m00044

ad3ab364-324a-4576-ae5a-cc31c58bdeee

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Multinational consumer goods corporation Procter & Gamble is a good
example of a company that understands the significance and impact of
marketing in a diverse marketplace. P&G has a long history of reaching
out to consumers from different sociocultural communities. In 1961, the
company became one of the first major manufacturers in the United States
to air a TV commercial in Spanish aimed at Hispanic consumers on a
Spanish-language channel (later known as Univisión).

After the Civil Rights Act was signed in 1964 and the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission (EEOC) was formed in 1965, P&G proactively
launched its own affirmative action plans across all its business units.
P&G instituted the changes even before the EEOC was fully functional.
That same year, P&G also conducted product research with Hispanic
consumers in Miami, focusing on the scent used in its Secret deodorant
line. This commitment to diversity in business practices has remained
strong through the years.

P&G continues to demonstrate how to embrace diversity marketing, not
just through actions, but through core beliefs and values. The company
debuted its "Widen the Screen" campaign in 2021 during the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) Image Awards.
The commercial has several short episodes developed by a team of Black
creators. Its message is intended to challenge stereotypes and negative
attitudes toward the Black community. In a special TV interview,
influencer and daytime TV celebrity Oprah Winfrey strongly praised the
campaign's creative opportunities, since Black creators account for only
6 percent of all films made. These types of initiatives are evidence
that P&G remains steadfast in its support of cultural and societal
values, as well as expanding marketing's horizons to be more inclusive.

Diversity in marketing is often shortsightedly thought of as simply
featuring people, objects, or situations linked to various cultural or
sociodemographic groups in marketing efforts. These are important
components, but diversity marketing goes much deeper than that. In a
2021 keynote presentation about advancing diversity in advertising and
business, P&G Chief Brand Officer Marc Pritchard emphasized that the
company's commitment to consumers extends to race, ethnicity, and gender
representation equal to the American population.

Pritchard added that true and complete inclusion calls for having
equitable representation throughout the entire business, including up
and down the company's supply chain. This means that even subcontracted
agencies, production crews, and media companies that P&G works with
reflect the market's diverse demographics. P&G is a diversity marketing
champion because it believes in the accurate representation of all
people in advertising and communications, regardless of cultural or
social group, to build a better society.

P&G's value-creating strategies and purposeful actions embody the
concepts of this chapter. Marketing in a diverse marketplace is about
understanding why and how to meet consumers' diversity-based needs,
while achieving corporate objectives and driving business sustainability
at the same time. P&G\'s campaign "Widen the Screen" invites viewers to
widen their perspectives and appreciate the full picture of Black
people\'s lives through a series of diverse everyday situations.

[Procter & Gamble \| Widen the Screen](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00001}

:::: {#rf-001 .note}
::: title
:::

1\.

Procter & Gamble,

A Common Goal Drives Our Aspirations: P&G and the Hispanic Community

, n.d.,
https://www.pg.com/images/company/who_we_are/diversity/multi/Hispanic%20Corporate%20Brochure%20-%20English.pdf.
::::

:::: {#rf-002 .note}
::: title
:::

2\.

OWN, "OWN and P&G Present: Widen the Screen---A Fuller View of Black
Life," May 20, 2021, YouTube video, 1:06, https://youtu.be/J11Vfgha6uc.
::::

:::: {#rf-003 .note}
::: title
:::

3\.

Jack Myers, "P&G's Marc Pritchard Sets Diversity Priorities and Goals
for Ad Community," MediaVillage, October 6, 2021,
https://www.mediavillage.com/article/pgs-marc-pritchard-sets-diversity-priorities-and-goals-for-ad-community/.
::::
