m00045

c8edd8c4-0664-48d2-92ab-f9c969a1d78d

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define marketing standardization.

Define marketing adaptation.

Explain when to use diversity marketing as an adaptation strategy.

# Standardization Strategy Defined {#sect-00002}

To meet the marketplace's demands, companies must carefully formulate
competitive strategies based on internal and external conditions. These
strategies must balance the capabilities of the organization's business
activities, such as marketing, sales, operations, customer service,
finance, and human resources management, with multiple environmental
factors in the market. Among these are competition, globalization,
technology, culture, and changes in consumer demographics and behavior.
Companies can choose between two types of strategic approaches,
standardization or adaptation, depending on these internal and external
variables.

Standardization is the process of purposefully applying identical or
consistent guidelines to achieve uniformity. It is not limited to goods
and services. Ideas, experiences, data, manufacturing processes,
metrics, and operating practices within a business can also be
standardized.

A standardized strategy is expressed through the sameness of an
offering's features, packaging, pricing, messaging, or advertising to
consumers in the marketplace. Companies adopt this strategy for several
reasons. These include increasing sales, reducing costs, maximizing
efficiencies, improving competitiveness, and gaining a larger customer
base.

Think about Apple products. The company standardizes its iPhone, iPad,
and Mac computers worldwide. Anywhere you go, Apple devices look and
work the same. Only the devices' power source is changed, because of
power voltage differences in different parts of the world.
Standardization allows Apple to streamline production, speed up market
launches, and increase device recognition around the globe.

# Adaptation Strategy Defined {#sect-00003}

Adaptation is the process of adjusting a company's work efforts, goods,
or services in response to specific needs, tastes, or expectations from
different groups of consumers. An adaptation strategy typically involves
two steps. The first is identifying the modifications required to
increase an offering's appeal among a targeted audience. The second is
implementing the changes based on the organization's abilities and
resources. Both of these tasks are crucial to determine the strategy's
viability.

Why do companies consider modifying products when doing so generally
entails additional costs? The reason is that adaptations are useful to
create unique market offerings, generate interest, or provide a
competitive differentiation. In other words, this strategy is advisable
when the outcome of the change results in reduced risks to the business.
Companies can also adapt an existing product, instead of creating a new
one, to reduce costs associated with producing new goods. For example,
Ford Motor Company adapts the D4 automobile platform for chassis design
and engine configuration to its Ford and Lincoln models to save money
and offer cars at competitive price points.

Sometimes businesses need adaptation strategies because of market
disruptions caused by socioeconomic issues, natural disasters, or health
concerns like the COVID-19 pandemic. Zoom, the video conferencing
company, was forced to adjust its practices at lightning speed to meet
the unexpected demand uptick caused by the pandemic. In only five months
(December 2019 to April 2020), Zoom's customer base grew from 10 million
to 300 million users. Zoom's adaptation strategy included new data
centers, extended partnerships, price and service changes, and platform
updates to serve all types of customers.

# Diversity Marketing as an Adaptation Strategy {#sect-00004}

In marketing, an adaptation strategy translates into tailoring the
marketing mix---product, price, place, and promotion---to suit the
preferences of targeted populations. Adaptation strategies are often
associated with entering a foreign country.

McDonald's is a good example of a company that adapts its marketing mix
to be locally relevant to diverse global consumers. McDonald's
introduced the McVeggie and the McAloo in India (see [\#](#)), the Bai
Shrimp Filet-O and the Bai Teriyaki Chicken Filet-O in Japan, poutine
fries in Canada, the Picanha ClubHouse Burger in Brazil, and the
Bubblegum Squash McFlurry in New Zealand. Besides adjusting the menu
(product), McDonald's also aligns advertisements (promotion) and
services with local expectations (price and place), while delivering a
consistent customer experience from one country to another.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

This strategy is not limited to marketing in different parts of the
globe. Companies can adjust any element of the marketing mix when
expanding their market share within a region or a single country. This
decision, however, should not be taken lightly. Adapting marketing
efforts can be costly, time consuming, and disruptive to the business.
Plus, unexpected changes in a product's message can be confusing to
existing customers.

Marketing adaptation is clearly an option to grow the marketplace. When
this strategy is based on a population's cultural or demographic
differences, it is diversity marketing. Here is a good example from
Nike. The "Nike by You" (see [\#](#)) shoe-designing service enables the
company to expand its appeal to different population segments. By
allowing consumers to change the footwear's colors and materials, Nike
delivers products adapted to audiences' ethnic and social preferences.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
Nike and Diversity
:::

To prepare for a marketing career, learning from companies that are
known for their diversity campaigns will help you with your future
campaigns. According to [eMarketer data](#), Nike is a company with one
of the highest levels of diversity in its advertising. Here are a few
examples supporting information about Nike's diversity and inclusion
campaigns:

Emmy-winning You Can't Stop Us

[Nike - You Can\'t Stop Us: Case Study (2021)](#)

You Can't Be Stopped campaign

Nike Unlimited You commercial

[nike: unlimited you](#)

Nike By You

Nike

Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion strategy

There are other companies that are also known for their diversity and
inclusion strategies. Read about some of them in this [HubSpot
article](#).
::::

Diversity marketing is an effective response to consumers' cultural or
demographic diversity in a market. Why is it an adaptation strategy?
Because diversity marketing involves changing a product or service to
match the needs, wants, and demands of a population's subgroup of
consumers.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00005}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00006}

:::: {#rf-004 .note}
::: title
:::

4\.

Jason Nazar, "13 Leadership Lessons from Zoom Founder and CEO Eric
Yuan,"

Entrepreneur

, April 21, 2021, https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/368550.
::::

:::: {#rf-005 .note}
::: title
:::

5\.

Masaaki Kotabe and Kristiaan Helsen,

Global Marketing Management

, 8th ed. (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2020), 252.
::::

# 

adaptation

the process of adjusting a company's work efforts, goods, or services in
response to specific needs, tastes, or expectations---whether real or
perceived---from different groups of consumers

marketing mix

the four key elements---product, price, place, and promotion---that
shape the development and execution of marketing objectives to reach a
target market

standardization

the process of purposefully applying identical or consistent guidelines
to goods or services to achieve uniformity
