m00046

db3b2ea5-aebf-48a9-aa62-5236c6555734

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define diversity marketing, multicultural marketing, and
sociodemographic marketing.

Explain why diversity marketing is needed in today's marketplace.

Explain the importance of diversity in market research.

List the factors that impact diversity marketing.

# Diversity Marketing Defined {#sect-00002}

As you read in the previous section, diversity marketing is a strategic
approach that involves identifying diverse subsegments of the population
within a market and creating intentional marketing efforts to reach
wider audiences. This last piece is key. It has an element of inclusion
because it purposefully incorporates identity-specific consumers that
have been overlooked or pushed to the margins of society such as some
ethnic minorities, people with disabilities, elderly adults, low-income
persons, and other groups. Marginalized consumers are often excluded in
mainstream advertising, translating into missed business opportunities.
Diversity marketing is a strategy for marketers to include them.

Diversity marketing is more than just an awareness of minority
identities, underrepresented communities, or racial distinctions. It is
about being culturally responsive, meaning having an actionable
understanding of diverse consumers' interests and preferences based on
shared cultural and sociodemographic characteristics. Consider the five
key parameters most often used to describe diversity: cultural, racial,
and ethnic; gender and sexual identity; generational; religion; and
disability. Culture, race, and ethnicity are part of the cultural
aspect, while the others are part of the sociodemographic aspect.
Because of the broad scope of diversity marketing, as seen in [\#](#),
this strategy can help marketers reach larger market audiences.
Diversity marketing can also influence consumers' mindsets and generate
positive attention.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# Importance of Diversity Marketing {#sect-00003}

The idea of marketing driven by consumer diversity is very relevant and
meaningful, because today's marketplace is changing dramatically. This
evolution is happening not only in the United States but also around the
globe. For marketers, this means that generalizing buyers, households,
or communities anywhere in the world is a shortsighted perspective,
because it limits business growth and commercial possibilities. Plus,
oversimplifying population segments can also adversely affect a
company's reputation by shifting the public's opinion in a negative way.
The consequences can hurt sales, lead to missed opportunities, and
undermine competitive status. This makes it essential to align markets
and diversity marketing goals.

Even though "one size fits all consumers" type of tactics worked in past
decades, that is no longer the case. Failure to recognize diversity
marketing as an essential component of any marketing plan in these
changing times is definitely a business blunder. In a study conducted by
Adobe in 2019 among 2,000+ consumers, results showed that 61 percent of
participants believed that diversity in marketing campaigns was
important, and at least 38 percent were also said to be more inclined to
trust brands that showed good diversity in advertisements. Inclusion and
diversity marketing are vital to a company's success in any market.

## What It Means to Businesses {#sect-00004}

Leading the marketing strategy with a diversity-driven intention can
increase customer satisfaction and build stronger brand loyalty. Top
Design Firms surveyed hundreds of consumers in late 2020 and found that
67 percent would consider making repeat purchases from companies
committed to diversity in marketing campaigns.

Another report confirmed that these observations are not restricted to
specific populations. Market analysis by Heat agency found that high
diversity scores for brands translated into a whopping 83 percent higher
preference by consumers. Besides improving brand sentiment overall,
studies show that companies that build emotional ties through diversity
marketing programs generate more revenue, increase stock price
performance, and enhance brand perceptions.

## What It Means to Consumers {#sect-00005}

Diversity marketing is important on a personal level because of what it
implies. Companies that prioritize this strategy clearly demonstrate a
higher level of understanding, value, and respect for all individuals in
society. The conscientious inclusion of racially, ethnically,
culturally, and socially distinct groups in marketing efforts suggests a
genuine desire to communicate and engage with everyone.

Acknowledging consumers' differences and adopting tactics to meet each
group's needs and preferences also validates individuals' importance in
the market. From a consumer standpoint, the application of diversity and
inclusion measures in a company's marketing practices shows a universal
recognition and appreciation for people.

# Factors Impacting Diversity Marketing {#sect-00006}

As shown in [\#](#), diversity marketing is based on a variety of
cultural and sociodemographic consumer characteristics. Marketers have
to be mindful of these distinctions so marketing communication campaigns
launched are sensitive to the audiences they are attempting to serve.
After all, cultural and sociodemographic factors can greatly influence
consumers' motivations, reactions, and decisions. Other related
variables, such as behavioral and personal, can shape buyers'
consumption levels and their receptiveness to marketing messages. Given
the impact of these factors, for companies to be successful in any
market, the focus of diversity marketing has to be customer centric
rather than company centric. Being customer centric is when a company
targets customers first regarding any decisions about its goods,
services, or experiences, while company centric is when a company
focuses decisions from the perspective of the organization. Building a
proper sociocultural conscience in marketing starts with good research.

## Market Research {#sect-00007}

Market research is essential for developing successful marketing
strategies because it leads to consumer insights. It also identifies
potential communication gaps. This means that diversity must be treated
as a market research factor to learn about multidimensional audiences.
Leveraging consumer diversity in the research process has several
benefits. For instance, it provides the information needed to better
understand people's cultural or social differences. This is useful for
companies to avoid wrong assumptions and avert public mishaps.

To do good research, marketers do not have to belong to or identify with
a specific consumer group. However, understanding how ethnic and
sociocultural differences impact buyers' decisions and actions requires
diversity marketing intelligence (DMiQ). Diversity marketing
intelligence refers to the capability of identifying, accepting, and
valuing the diversity of consumers within a market and using this
knowledge to tailor the marketing mix accordingly.

In early 2018, Tarte Cosmetics introduced to the market its highly
anticipated Shape Tape Foundation. The launch featured 15 shades of
makeup, almost all light tones. However, the product was not well
received. Loyal customers were furious because of the lack of shades for
people with darker skin. Tarte Cosmetics was accused of being a
whitewashed brand and even making deeper skin-toned people feel
inadequate. The company quickly apologized for alienating customers and
changed its product and marketing communication.

:::: {#note-00007 .note}
::: title
Fenty Beauty
:::

Rihanna did more than just lend her name to the brand Fenty Beauty---she
also developed products that increased diversity in the beauty business
with its 40-shade foundation range and a wide range of sizes, making
\$100 million in sales the first 40 days! The company has been
criticized for use of child labor by some of its suppliers, and has made
what its founder described as careless choices during a fashion show.
But it remains known for continuing to reflect a more inclusive approach
to beauty and clothing products. [Read more about Fenty Beauty from this
Latana article](#) or this [article from *Newsweek*](#).
::::

When diversity marketing efforts fall short, as the Tarte Cosmetics case
shows, it is often the result of racially or socially charged
insensitivities and missteps. The outcome can have costly repercussions
for companies. In 2017, PepsiCo (see [\#](#)) received heavy backlash
for its "Live for Now Moments Anthem" campaign featuring Kendall Jenner.
The commercial was criticized for trivializing the Black Lives Matter
(BLM) movement and undermining protesters' real-life hardships in
pursuit of peace and justice. It was described as insensitive and
offensive.

:::: {#note-00009 .note}
::: title
Live for Now Moments Anthem
:::

Evaluating successful campaigns and failures is important in the
learning process. Find as many opportunities as you can to learn from
failures. Start by watching Live for Now Moments for an example of a
campaign that failed because it was offensive and missed the mark.

[Pepsi "Live For Now Moments Anthem" starring Kendall Jenner & feat
"Lions" by Skip Marley](#)
::::

PepsiCo defended its position as not intending to be socially
disrespectful. However, PepsiCo withdrew the commercial, estimated to
have cost \$5 million to produce, and widely apologized to the market
and to Jenner. A final lesson here is that when diversity marketing
efforts are done correctly---as Fenty Beauty did---it can boost brand
awareness, consumer engagement, and sales.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

## Race and Ethnicity {#sect-00008}

Two out of every five individuals in the United States---over 40 percent
of the population---identify racially or ethnically as other than
non-Hispanic White. Researchers expect this trend to keep growing in the
coming decades, and as consumer diversity increases, cultural
identification becomes even more important. Race, ethnicity, and culture
give meaning to one another. This makes it critical for marketers to pay
attention to how multiracial or multiethnic consumers identify
culturally. Having a multicultural identity means that a person has been
exposed to various cultures and self-identifies as being part of more
than one racial or ethnic community or various social groups. We will
focus on four key multicultural identity segments of the American
population: Hispanic, Black, Asian, and Native American/Alaska Native.

Being multicultural can take many forms. Multicultural individuals may
speak multiple languages or have different sets of friends in each
culture. From a marketing perspective, multicultural consumers may have
different responses to brands or products depending on their
multicultural affiliation. Why is this significant? Because marketers
must consider the effects of multiculturalism on the marketplace when
developing the marketing mix. Race and ethnicity are clearly linked to
diversity marketing.

Modelo Especial is a good example. Modelo Especial is a Mexican beer
that has successfully capitalized on its heritage to target the Hispanic
population while also appealing to the general market. Marketed by
Constellation Brands, the beer has had strong sales in the United States
since the 1990s. In 2019, Hispanic consumers captured close to 70
percent of the brand's national sales, but Hispanic people are only
about half of the customer base. Over the course of several decades,
various aspects of Hispanic culture have been widely embraced in the
United States. Have you heard of artists like Jennifer Lopez, Pitbull,
Bad Bunny, and J Balvin? The marketing team at Constellations Brands
attributes the brand's mainstream appeal not only to connecting well
with Hispanic consumers but also to the openness of millennial and Gen Z
consumers to different cultures and lifestyles.

## Sociodemographics {#sect-00009}

In marketing, sociodemographics describes the combination of social and
demographic factors that characterize specific consumer groups in the
market. These factors are mostly quantifiable, meaning they can be
measured or verified to a certain extent. Though race and ethnicity are
cultural factors, sometimes they are included in market research as
sociodemographic parameters. This is done to increase the generalization
of consumer findings and to uncover potential areas of concern linked to
social issues.

Sociodemographic variables typically consist of gender and sexual
orientation, age or generation, family structure, religion, education
level, and income. The latter two are also frequently associated with
socioeconomic status. Disability is another variable that can be treated
as a demographic factor. [\#](#) offers a more comprehensive list of
diversity marketing's sociodemographic factors.

Just like with multicultural consumers, segmenting buyers based on
shared sociodemographic factors allows companies to tailor goods or
services to match the needs and preferences of this diverse group. This
enables marketers to develop the right marketing mix---as well as create
effective advertising content---to influence distinct consumers. Here is
how Disney uses family structure as a sociodemographic factor to segment
and target social media users. Disney on Ice is a music and skating show
that brings the magic of Disney to ice rinks around the country. People
with small children are more likely to consider family entertainment
activities, so Disney on Ice targets these consumers on Facebook with
tailored family-oriented ads.

# Multicultural Marketing Defined {#sect-00010}

Multicultural marketing is a strategic approach to intentionally target
audiences based on different racial, ethnic, and cultural identities and
backgrounds. It focuses on relevant, value-rich, and culturally
authentic communication tailored to multicultural consumers.

You are probably asking, Is multicultural marketing the same thing as
diversity marketing? After all, both are often used interchangeably. The
answer is no; they are not the same thing. Diversity marketing is an
inclusive approach that results in reaching a wider portion of the
entire market. Multicultural marketing is a *subcategory* of diversity
marketing that is aimed at multicultural individuals.

## Multicultural Populations {#sect-00011}

Racial and ethnic diversity continue to grow every day around the world.
In the United States, in particular, demographers predict a
majority--minority population shift by the mid-2040s, as [\#](#) shows.
In other words, the bulk of American consumers will identify as
multicultural, meaning racially and ethnically diverse people of color.

This projection has enormous marketing implications for companies and
nonprofit organizations. As the marketplace becomes even more racially
and ethnically diverse, marketing efforts must be aligned to the needs
and expectations of multicultural groups to be effective.

Let's take a closer look at these key multicultural segments of the
American population:

The

Hispanic population

is the largest multicultural group in the nation and makes up about 19
percent of the total population. According to data-driven marketing
company

Claritas

, the Hispanic population is one of the fastest-growing groups, with
over 63 million individuals, and is also responsible for 59 percent of
the country's population growth between 2010 and 2021.

:::: {#note-00017 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Plus, by 2026, business strategists believe that nearly two out of every
three consumers in the United States will belong to this ethnic group.

:::: {#note-00018 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

With a median age of 29, this group also has the youngest population in
the country.

The

Black population

is also a growing segment with 46.9 million individuals---or 14.2
percent of the total population---according to the 2020 US Census. This
group is made up of three different subethnicities: individuals who
identify as Black alone (single race), or as Black Hispanic, or as Black
with another race such as White or Native American (multiracial). The
Black population in general has the second youngest median age. In fact,
almost 60 percent of this group were millennials or younger (under the
age of 38) in 2019 based on findings from the American Community Survey.

:::: {#note-00019 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

The

Asian population

accounts for 7.2 percent of the American population with 24 million
individuals from combined subethnicities as reported by the 2020 Census.
Like Black people, Asian people also self-classify as either single
race, Asian Hispanic, or multiracial individuals. Communities often
included as part of the Asian multiracial composition are Native
Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders. Asians' three classifications combined
experienced the fastest population growth of all multicultural segments
in the nation between 2000 and 2019.

:::: {#note-00020 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

The Asian population has a median age of 34 and is expected to reach
around 35 million individuals by 2040.

:::: {#note-00021 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

The

Native American/Alaska Native population

represents 1.1 percent of the population in the United States with 3.7
million individuals identifying as single race Native people. During the
2020 Census, these Native groups were combined with other races and
ethnicities, boosting the number to 9.7 million people, or about 2.9
percent of the total population.

:::: {#note-00022 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

# Sociodemographic Marketing Defined {#sect-00012}

Sociodemographic marketing is a strategic approach to intentionally
target audiences based on shared social and demographic characteristics.
Sounds familiar? Like multicultural marketing, sociodemographic
marketing also focuses on relevant and authentic communications with
consumers. Both strategies help business and organizations align their
products and services with audiences' needs, preferences, and
expectations.

In a 2019 study, nearly 3,000 consumers were asked to consider ads with
sociodemographic attributes like gender identity, sexual orientation,
age, socioeconomic status, and physical ability. Results showed 64
percent of consumers taking some sort of action after seeing an ad with
sociodemographic diversity.

You might be wondering, Is sociodemographic marketing the same thing as
diversity marketing then? The answer is no. Again, as with multicultural
marketing, sociodemographic marketing includes underrepresented and
overlooked consumers in a large population. Sociodemographic marketing
is another *subcategory* of diversity marketing.

## Sociodemographic Populations {#sect-00013}

While all sociodemographic consumer groups are important, the following
are essential segments of sociodemographic marketing:

LGBTQIA+ population

. LGBTQIA+ stands for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transsexual,
queer/questioning, intersex, asexual, and other sexual identities. About
5.6 percent of American adults---roughly 14.4 million
individuals---identify as LGBTQIA+ according to a 2020 survey.

:::: {#note-00024 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

In general, LGBTQIA+ consumers spend more at retail stores than other
groups and have a higher percentage of online purchases compared to
non-LGBTQIA+ households. Not only is this segment part of diversity
marketing, but the LGBTQIA+ community is very diverse too.

Generational population

. Consumers are grouped into age clusters based on birth year. These
populations include 21.7 million Traditionalist or

Silent Generation

(born between 1928 and 1945), 70.6 million

baby boomers

(born between 1946 and 1964), 65 million

Generation X

(born between 1965 and 1980), 72.2 million

Generation Y

or

millennials

(born between 1981 and1996), 67 million

Generation Z

or

Zoomers

(born between 1997 and 2009), and 27.6 million Generation Alpha (born
between 2010 and 2025) according to 2020 US Census data.

:::: {#note-00025 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Every generation is unique and has different historical references,
challenges, interests, and technological experiences that impact these
consumers' preferences and appeals.

Socioeconomically disadvantaged population

. These individuals tend to come from low-income households, experience
financial insecurity, and have less access to education. In the United
States, the estimated number of people living in poverty was over 34
million individuals in 2019.

:::: {#note-00026 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

The majority of disadvantaged consumers are located either in poor rural
areas or inner-city communities that lack social resources and
infrastructure to reduce poverty.

:::: {#note-00027 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Marketers must be careful targeting these consumers to avoid negative
repercussions from the market.

Consumers with disabilities

. This group represents an estimated 61 million Americans. About one in
four adults lives with some type of disability.

:::: {#note-00028 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Disability is a classification derived from an impairment related to
mobility, learning, intellectual, or other types of functions. This
group is also considered very diverse because disabilities span
cultural, social, and demographic factors. Consumers with disabilities
have been traditionally underrepresented in marketing efforts, though
studies show they are one of the largest sociodemographic market
opportunities after baby boomers and other segments.

:::: {#note-00029 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

:::: {#note-00030 .note}
::: title
Multicultural Marketing Director
:::

With the growing opportunities for multicultural marketing, demand is
growing for multicultural marketing directors. If this job opportunity
interests you, do your research on what type of skills are desired by
hiring managers. To get you started, read this article about the [7 Must
Have Qualities in a Multicultural Marketing Director](#). You can also
learn directly from marketing executives in this article about [how
marketers can foster diverse cultures](#) and who is getting hired and
promoted in this area. The best way to learn is to follow others doing
the work. Expand your network to include diverse and inclusive leaders.
Start by checking out this [list of 59 female marketing and growth
influencers](#).

As you're building a portfolio of skills for the job market, remember to
continue to develop your soft skills. Why, you might ask? Read this
article: [7 Soft Skills You Need to Achieve Career Growth](#).
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00014}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00015}

:::: {#rf-006 .note}
::: title
:::

6\.

Helen Eboh Cletus et al., "Prospects and Challenges of Workplace
Diversity in Modern Day Organizations: A Critical Review,"

Holistica

9, no. 2 (August 2018): 35--52, https://doi.org/10.2478/hjbpa-2018-0011.
::::

:::: {#rf-007 .note}
::: title
:::

7\.

Sonia Thompson, "Data Shows Consumers Want Diversity in Marketing: Why
Many Brands Struggle to Get It Right and How to Fix,"

Forbes

, February 5, 2020,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/soniathompson/2020/02/05/data-shows-consumers-want-diversity-in-marketing-why-many-brands-struggle-to-get-it-right-and-how-to-fix/.
::::

:::: {#rf-008 .note}
::: title
:::

8\.

Shelby Jordan, "Why Is Diversity Marketing Important?," Top Design
Firms, November 11, 2020,
https://topdesignfirms.com/web-design/blog/diversity-marketing.
::::

:::: {#rf-009 .note}
::: title
:::

9\.

Robert Williams, "Study: Diversity in Ads Correlates to Gains in
Revenue, Brand Perception," Marketing Dive, Industry Dive, October 2,
2019,
https://www.marketingdive.com/news/study-diversity-in-ads-correlates-to-gains-in-revenue-brand-perception/564153/.
::::

:::: {#rf-010 .note}
::: title
:::

10\.

"The Heat™ Test: Measuring DEI Effectiveness in Advertising," Deloitte
Digital, Deloitte, last modified August 12, 2022,
https://www.deloittedigital.com/us/en/offerings/customer-led-marketing/advertising\--marketing-and-commerce/heat-test.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-011 .note}
::: title
:::

11\.

Louis Baragona, "Fans Are Furious after Tarte Unveiled Its New
Foundations That Cater Almost Entirely to White People," Insider,
January 18, 2018,
https://www.insider.com/tarte-cosmetics-shape-tape-foundation-range-2018-1.
::::

:::: {#rf-012 .note}
::: title
:::

12\.

Alexander Smith, "Pepsi Pulls Controversial Kendall Jenner Ad after
Outcry," NBC News, NBC Universal, April 5, 2017,
https://www.nbcnews.com/news/nbcblk/pepsi-ad-kendall-jenner-echoes-black-lives-matter-sparks-anger-n742811.
::::

:::: {#rf-013 .note}
::: title
:::

13\.

Char Adams, "How Many Millions Could Pepsi's Pulled Kendall Jenner Ad
Cost the Company?,"

Essence

, updated October 26, 2020,
https://www.essence.com/culture/kendall-jenner-pepsi-commercial-company-cost/.
::::

:::: {#rf-014 .note}
::: title
:::

14\.

Abby Budiman, "Americans Are More Positive about the Long-Term Rise in
US Racial and Ethnic Diversity Than in 2016," Pew Research Center,
October 1, 2020,
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2020/10/01/americans-are-more-positive-about-the-long-term-rise-in-u-s-racial-and-ethnic-diversity-than-in-2016/.
::::

:::: {#rf-015 .note}
::: title
:::

15\.

Andre Anugerah Pekerti and David Clinton Thomas, "n-Culturals: Modeling
the Multicultural Identity,"

Cross Cultural & Strategic Management

23, no. 1 (2016): 101--127, https://doi.org/10.1108/CCSM-06-2014-0063.
::::

:::: {#rf-016 .note}
::: title
:::

16\.

Eva Kipnis et al., "Consumer Multicultural Identity Affiliation:
Reassessing Identity Segmentation in Multicultural Markets,"

Journal of Business Research

98 (May 2019): 126--141, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2018.11.056.
::::

:::: {#rf-017 .note}
::: title
:::

17\.

Canadiuga Wine Company, "Amendment No. 2 to Form S-3 Registration
Statement under the Securities Act of 1933," All SEC Filings,
Constellation Brands, November 8, 1994,
https://ir.cbrands.com/sec-filings/all-sec-filings?form_type=&year=1994##document-2239-0000950131-94-001692-2.
::::

:::: {#rf-018 .note}
::: title
:::

18\.

Alexia Elejalde-Ruiz, "Chicago, Long a Miller Stronghold, Has a New
Top-Selling Beer: Modelo Especial Captures the City's Sales Crown,"

Chicago Tribune

, September 5, 2019,
https://www.chicagotribune.com/business/ct-biz-modelo-especial-growth-chicago-20190905-dq3xaw3npzdendkjsgtteyzvsy-story.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-019 .note}
::: title
:::

19\.

Annette Flanagin, Tracy Frey, and Stacy L. Christiansen, "Updated
Guidance on the Reporting of Race and Ethnicity in Medical and Science
Journals,"

JAMA

326, no. 7 (August 17, 2021): 621--627,
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2021.13304.
::::

:::: {#rf-020 .note}
::: title
:::

20\.

Claritas,

The 2021 Hispanic Market Report: The New American Mainstream

, 2021, https://www2.claritas.com/2021-Hispanic-Market-Report-Website.
::::

:::: {#rf-021 .note}
::: title
:::

21\.

Claritas, "Claritas Projects Hispanic Consumers Will Account for 67% of
Total US Population Growth in the Next Five Years," GlobeNewswire,
September 20, 2021,
https://www.globenewswire.com/en/news-release/2021/09/20/2299985/0/en/Claritas-Projects-Hispanic-Consumers-Will-Account-for-67-of-Total-U-S-Population-Growth-in-the-Next-Five-Years.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-022 .note}
::: title
:::

22\.

Christine Tamir, "The Growing Diversity of Black America," Pew Research
Center, March 25, 2021,
https://www.pewresearch.org/social-trends/2021/03/25/the-growing-diversity-of-black-america/.
::::

:::: {#rf-023 .note}
::: title
:::

23\.

Abby Budiman and Neil G. Ruiz, "Asian Americans Are the Fastest-Growing
Racial or Ethnic Group in the US," Pew Research Center, April 9, 2021,
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2021/04/09/asian-americans-are-the-fastest-growing-racial-or-ethnic-group-in-the-u-s/.
::::

:::: {#rf-024 .note}
::: title
:::

24\.

Abby Budiman and Neil G. Ruiz, "Key facts about Asian Americans, a
Diverse and Growing Population," Pew Research Center, April 29, 2021,
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2021/04/29/key-facts-about-asian-americans/.
::::

:::: {#rf-025 .note}
::: title
:::

25\.

Tim Henderson, "Census Prompts Push for More Indigenous School Lessons,"

Stateline

(blog), The Pew Charitable Trusts, October 19, 2021,
https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/blogs/stateline/2021/10/19/census-prompts-push-for-more-indigenous-school-lessons.
::::

:::: {#rf-026 .note}
::: title
:::

26\.

Victoria Petrock, "Consumers Expect Brands to Be Inclusive," Insider
Intelligence, November 25, 2020,
https://www.emarketer.com/content/consumers-expect-brands-inclusive.
::::

:::: {#rf-027 .note}
::: title
:::

27\.

Jeffrey M. Jones, "LGBT Identification Rises to 5.6% in Latest US
Estimate," Gallup, February 24, 2021,
https://news.gallup.com/poll/329708/lgbt-identification-rises-latest-estimate.aspx.
::::

:::: {#rf-028 .note}
::: title
:::

28\.

Michael Dimock, "Defining Generations: Where Millennials End and
Generation Z Begins," Pew Research Center, January 17, 2019,
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/01/17/where-millennials-end-and-generation-z-begins/.
::::

:::: {#rf-029 .note}
::: title
:::

29\.

Jessica Semega et al.,

Income and Poverty in the United States: 2019

, Report No. P60-270 (Washington, DC: United States Census Bureau,
September 2020),
https://www.census.gov/library/publications/2020/demo/p60-270.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-030 .note}
::: title
:::

30\.

"New Index Ranks America's 100 Most Disadvantaged Communities,"
Affecting Change to Prevent & Alleviate Poverty, Poverty Solution at the
University of Michigan, January 30, 2020,
https://poverty.umich.edu/2020/01/30/new-index-ranks-americas-100-most-disadvantaged-communities/.
::::

:::: {#rf-031 .note}
::: title
:::

31\.

"Disability Impacts All of Us," infographic, Disability and Health
Promotion, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, last reviewed
September 16, 2020,
https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/disabilityandhealth/infographic-disability-impacts-all.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-032 .note}
::: title
:::

32\.

National Business & Disability Council, "Disabilities in the United
States," infographic, The Viscardi Center, July 15, 2015,
https://www.viscardicenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/2015_NBDC_MAP_InfoGraphic_Disabilities_in_the_United_States_market_07.15.15.pdf.
::::

# 

Asian population

third largest multicultural group in the United States; made up of 22
different subethnicities from the Asian continent, Hawaii, and islands
of the Pacific; can belong to a single race or mixed races

Black population

second largest multicultural group in the United States; made up of
three different subethnicities: single race, Black Hispanic, or Black
mixed with another race (White or Native American)

company centric

a company's approach to focusing decisions and execution from the
perspective of the organization rather than the customers

consumers with disabilities

sociodemographic group living with some type of disability related to
mobility, learning, intellectual, or other types of functions; a very
diverse group because disabilities span cultural, social, and
demographic factors

customer centric

a company's focus on putting targeted customers first regarding any
decisions about its goods, services, or experiences to create
satisfaction and strengthen loyalty

diversity marketing

a strategic approach that involves identifying different subsegments of
the population---

based on shared cultural and sociodemographic characteristics

---and creating intentional marketing efforts to connect with these
consumer groups

diversity marketing intelligence (DMiQ)

the capability of identifying, accepting, and valuing the diverseness of
consumers within a market and using this knowledge to tailor the
marketing mix accordingly

generational population

sociodemographic category based on birth year clusters that includes
Lost Generation (1883--1900), Greatest Generation (1901--1927),
Traditionalist/Silent Generation (1928--1945), baby boomers
(1946--1964), Generation X (1965--1980), millennials/Generation Y
(1981--1996), Zoomers/Generation Z (1997--2009), and Generation Alpha
(2010--2024)

Hispanic population

largest multicultural group in the United States; made up of diverse
subethnicities and races originating from 20 different Spanish-speaking
countries in North America, Central America, the Caribbean, South
America, and Europe

LGBTQIA+ population

community composed of individuals who express a diversity of genders,
preferences, and sexual orientations that include lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transsexual, queer/questioning, intersex, asexual, and other
sexual identities

marginalized consumers

populations of consumers that have been pushed to the margins of society
and are often excluded in mainstream advertising

multicultural identity

having an affinity with multiple racial or ethnic groups that a person
has been exposed to and self-categorizing as being part of more than one
of them

multicultural marketing

a subcategory of diversity marketing aimed at intentionally targeting
audiences based on different racial, ethnic, and cultural identities and
backgrounds

Native American, Alaska Native population

multicultural group of individuals of a single race and mixed races who
are native to the United States and its territories including American
Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and American Samoans

sociodemographic marketing

a subcategory of diversity marketing aimed at intentionally targeting
audiences based on shared social and demographic characteristics such as
gender and sexual orientation, age or generation, family structure,
religion, education, income level, and disability

sociodemographics

the combination of social and demographic factors that characterize
specific consumer groups in the market

socioeconomically disadvantaged population

disadvantaged community that lacks social resources and infrastructure
to reduce poverty; members tend to be in low-income households,
experience financial insecurity, and have less access to education
