m00047

a18c5ec6-92f4-4db2-9f31-d295f7abcc83

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define culture.

Explain the difference between tangible and intangible cultural
objectives.

List the main elements through which culture is expressed.

Describe Hofstede's cultural dimensions.

# What Is Culture? {#sect-00002}

You have already read about corporate culture in [Marketing and Customer
Value](#) and cultural factors influencing buying behavior in [Consumer
Markets and Purchasing Behavior](#). Let's explore culture in more
detail. After all, learning about culture is the first step to
understand why the concept is a fundamental component of multicultural
marketing and how it connects with diversity marketing.

Culture refers to the social norms, beliefs, behaviors, and
accomplishments that characterize a particular set of individuals.
Culture also encompasses shared customs, arts, language, foods, and
knowledge. In essence, it is a snapshot of a society's accepted way of
living at a given place or time. [\#](#) provides a more extensive view
of the things that represent it. As you can see, culture clearly
influences many aspects of life.

The term originates from the Latin word *cultura*, which is associated
with nurturing, growing, and cultivating. This explanation makes sense
because some cultural aspects are taught or passed down from one
generation to the next. Think of it as planting a seed---not a physical
one, but a seed of inner values. Culture is also fostered through
community socialization. The outcome of these shared learnings leads to
the continued growth of a group's cultural identity and its
idiosyncrasies.

To be effective in an increasingly diverse marketplace, marketers need
to recognize the profound role that culture plays in consumers'
behaviors and purchasing decisions. That is why multicultural insights
are so important to diversity marketing.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# Tangible versus Intangible Culture {#sect-00003}

Culture is both tangible and intangible. This means that it can be seen,
but it can also be concealed. Anthropologist Edward T. Hall describes it
as an iceberg with external and internal surfaces. As [\#](#) depicts,
some elements of culture are readily visible, like the tip of the
iceberg. Traditions, music, languages, artifacts, clothing, and
literature are just a few aspects that are easy to recognize. They are
tangible and external. In other words, they are the conscious part of
culture.

Other aspects of culture are like the bottom part of the iceberg. Did
you know that 90 percent of an iceberg's mass is hidden below the
waterline? Thought processes, assumptions, skills, beliefs, and
interpretations are more difficult to observe. Can you see a person's
thoughts? Can you understand a person's worldviews without asking? These
things happen out of sight, making them the subconscious part of
culture. Intangible and internal aspects are just like the larger
portion of the iceberg in the sense that they are often beneath the
surface.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

The iceberg analogy gives us a valuable lesson about cultural insights.
Connecting with multicultural consumers requires understanding not only
those elements of culture that can be observed but also those that are
deep-seated in a specific community.

The "Texican Whopper" campaign from Burger King (see [\#](#)) makes this
point clear. Burger King was forced to revise the ads that featured a
tiny Mexican wrestler dressed in a poncho-style Mexican flag standing
next to a tall American cowboy. Some Spanish-speaking customers thought
the campaign was funny. However, others were offended. Insights about
the distaste for stereotypes and the high respect for the flag as a
national symbol could have prevented this situation. It could have also
saved Burger King money because the campaign had to be redone.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

# Main Expressions of Culture {#sect-00004}

Culture is expressed through emotional experiences, symbols, linguistic
communication, values and attitudes, and other practices. Cultural
expressions are a vital part of a person's identity. They provide
insights about what an individual believes in or why an individual
behaves a certain way. How would you perceive somebody waving an
American flag on a holiday like Memorial Day, Fourth of July, or
Veteran's Day? You would probably think the person is patriotic, right?
What about somebody with a colorful sugar skull face painting on Día de
Los Muertos? Or how about someone with beautifully henna-decorated hands
for Diwali? Visible manifestations of culture empower people to be
comfortable with personal thoughts and feelings. Visible symbols also
help people to be accepted in a given community by showing solidarity.

## Symbols {#sect-00005}

Symbols are essential expressions of culture that represent a group's
ideologies, values, and actions. They include things such as objects,
ceremonial artifacts, designs, colors, and ideas. Printed characters,
words, signs, and logos can be symbols too. Even punctuation marks, or
emoticons, symbolize facial expressions or people's feelings. Marketers
must be careful when using symbols because they can have different
representations or meanings among different cultures. For instance, the
emoticon :) symbolizes happiness in the United States. However, in Japan
the emoticon for happiness looks more like this (\^\_\^) or has a
triangle-shaped mouth instead of a parenthesis.

In the United States, the rainbow flag and its variations are symbols of
the LGBTQIA+ community. Yet, for people who emigrated from Peru or have
family in the Andes, the rainbow flag symbolizes the reign of the Inca
empire. As you can see in [\#](#), both flags are alike but not
identical (the Andean rainbow flag has two blue stripes). Despite the
similarities, the rainbow flag as a symbol has different meanings to
both groups.

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

## Language {#sect-00006}

Like symbols, language is an important part of culture. Language
communicates personal identity. It also shapes how people perceive the
world around them. Have you heard of 9Lives? It is a popular brand of
cat food in the United States owned by the J.M. Smucker Company. The
brand's name comes from the popular expression that cats have nine
lives. However, did you know that in Spanish and Portuguese, the
expression is that cats only have seven lives? For these multicultural
consumers, such language differences can influence their perceptions of
the product.

Language takes verbal and nonverbal forms; it can be spoken, signed, or
written. In fact, there were 7,139 living languages reported around the
world in 2021, with 23 of them in particular adding up to a combined
number of speakers totaling over half the globe's population. The top 15
languages in [\#](#) are based on the number of native- and
second-language speakers in the world. Language is a main expression of
culture because it provides insights to connect with audiences.

<figure id="fig-00005">

</figure>

As you have read, consumer diversity in the marketplace is growing. That
is why it is imperative for marketers to conduct language research with
targeted populations to avoid miscommunication or lost opportunities.
This means that even within cultural groups, there are speech
regionalisms and slang terms that can affect the success of marketing
campaigns.

The Hispanic population has multiple subethnicities that prove this
point. Let's say that an automotive tire company wants to market its
product to Hispanic consumers throughout the United States. The company
could create several ad variations using words for *tire* that are
popular among the subgroups. It could use the word *gomas* for Puerto
Rican consumers in New York, *llantas* for Mexican buyers in Texas,
*neumáticos* for Chilean clients in California, or *ruedas* for Cuban
shoppers in Florida. The challenge for the company would be to decide if
the effort and expense associated with creating multiple ads are
justified. It should also consider if the words have other meanings
among the subgroups. For example, for Puerto Ricans *ruedas* are thin
wheels, not something associated with car tires.

## Values and Attitudes {#sect-00007}

Values are cultural indicators of a society's standards for goodness and
justice. They are described as basic beliefs that guide behavior and
give meaning to actions and attitudes. Dutch social psychologist and
diversity thinker Geert Hofstede created a survey to uncover how
national culture reflects a society's values. Hofstede summarized the
survey's findings into the following dimensions:

Individualism versus Collectivism.

Culture is classified as either individualistic or collectivistic. In
the United States, non-Hispanic White people and individuals of European
descent tend to have an individualistic view. Individualism places a
higher value on personal accomplishments and individual experiences.
Hispanic, Black, and Asian people lean toward a collectivistic view.

:::: {#note-00008 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Collectivism values achieving group or family goals above those of
individuals. The level of individualism versus collectivism, however,
varies within multicultural segments, so it is important not to make
assumptions.

High versus Low Power Distance.

In addition to their basic function, products can also serve to display
an individual's power or position in society. Think about flip phones
and smartphones. Cost-wise, the traditional flip phones are a lot less
expensive in general. Yet, smartphone ownership is on the rise. This is
due not only to the additional capabilities of smartphones, but also to
the fact that their ownership is seen as a symbol of social status.
Hispanic and Black people also use smartphones more than other groups
for online access to health information and educational content.

:::: {#note-00009 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Masculinity versus Femininity.

Gender can strongly impact the creative concept and messaging behind
marketing promotions, ads, and social media. American society in general
is masculine oriented, with Black men having a stronger view of
masculinity than non-Hispanic White and Hispanic counterparts.

:::: {#note-00010 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Achievement, power, and strength are considered masculine traits. For
this reason, the message of many ads in the United States is about
product performance and functionality. Some Asian groups such as
Japanese and Chinese are also masculine oriented. However, other Asian
subgroups are considered more feminine oriented.

:::: {#note-00011 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

For these consumers, visual ads that emphasize quality of life, people,
and relationships would have a higher appeal.

Uncertainty Avoidance.

A high dislike for ambiguity and the unknown is not just an individual
trait; it is a characteristic of societies in general. Cultures that do
not tolerate uncertainty well seek safety and rules to reduce anxiety.
These cultures also embrace technology to feel safer, which might
explain why Hispanic people are such quick adopters of it. Black and
Asian people also tend to avoid uncertainty and high risks more than
non-Hispanic White people.

:::: {#note-00012 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Long-Term versus Short-Term Orientation.

This dimension describes how individuals believe and behave in society.
It is also based on links to the past and challenges in the future.
Cultures with long-term orientation value perseverance, orderliness,
thriftiness, and having a sense of shame. Asian people overall rate
extremely high in the long-term orientation.

:::: {#note-00013 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Short-term cultures, on the other hand, focus more on personal
steadiness, happiness, and stability. The challenge for marketers is to
balance orientations to successfully reach diverse audiences and
influence consumption.

Indulgence versus Restraint.

Societies that prioritize satisfaction, leading a happy life, and
savoring leisure activities with family and friends are described as
indulgent. On the other hand, societies that favor living according to
strict traditional norms and curbing life's enjoyment are seen as
restrained.

# How Culture Influences Diversity Marketing {#sect-00008}

Identifying multicultural population segments and engaging them with
intentional efforts is at the core of multicultural marketing. However,
this requires having cultural insights because culture influences
consumers' decision-making processes and purchasing behaviors. The lack
of cultural insights can spell disaster when marketing to this audience.

Let's look at some cultural perspectives about living experiences,
outlook, and community involvement. Living in the present moment and
sharing situations with loved ones is an important goal to 42 percent of
Hispanic people in comparison to only 23 percent of non-Hispanic White
people. Based on this insight, marketers targeting Hispanic consumers
should create advertisements that feature meaningful messages and
friendly people sharing a profound experience instead of simply showing
the features of a product or service.

Hispanic, Black, and Asian consumers overall are more optimistic than
non-Hispanic White consumers. In a study about their financial outlook,
multicultural consumers were twice as optimistic as non-Hispanic White
consumers about reaching economic success in their lifetime. As
collectivistic-oriented cultures, they also think more about family and
community when making financial decisions. Plus, when it comes to
community, Hispanic and Black consumers believe more can be achieved by
working together than non-Hispanic White consumers.

These insights suggest that expressions of culture and elements like
confidence, hope, and teamwork are crucial for implementing
multicultural marketing campaigns. As you read earlier, multicultural
marketing is a subcategory of diversity marketing. This means that
culture has a significant impact on diversity marketing as well.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00009}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00010}

:::: {#rf-033 .note}
::: title
:::

33\.

Merriam-Webster, s.v. "culture (

n

.)," accessed October 30, 2021,
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/culture.
::::

:::: {#rf-034 .note}
::: title
:::

34\.

Mayra Rodriguez Ruiz and Neusa Olinda Varela Spínola, "Improving the
Intercultural Communicative Competence of English Language Students,"

Journal of Intercultural Communication

, no. 49 (March 2019), https://immi.se/oldwebsite/nr49/ruiz.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-035 .note}
::: title
:::

35\.

University of Alberta, "Culture Is Key to Interpreting Facial Emotions,"
ScienceDaily, April 5, 2007,
https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2007/04/070404162321.htm.
::::

:::: {#rf-036 .note}
::: title
:::

36\.

Pavlína Springerová and Zdeňka Picková, "Aspects Determining the
Auto-identification of Native Communities in Contemporary Peru,"

Ethnologia Actualis

18, no. 1 (June 2018): 68--92, https://doi.org/10.2478/eas-2018-0010.
::::

:::: {#rf-037 .note}
::: title
:::

37\.

David M. Eberhard, Gary F. Simons, and Charles D. Fennig, eds., "How
Many Languages Are There in the World?," in

Ethnologue: Languages of the World

, 25th ed. (Dallas, TX: SIL International), accessed October 30, 2021,
https://www.ethnologue.com/guides/how-many-languages.
::::

:::: {#rf-038 .note}
::: title
:::

38\.

Julie Otto, "Connecting with Hispanics in South Florida," Sun Sentinel
Media Group, August 22, 2018,
https://www.sunsentinelmediagroup.com/blog/connecting-with-hispanics-in-south-florida/.
::::

:::: {#rf-039 .note}
::: title
:::

39\.

"Geert Hofstede," People, The British Library, accessed October 30,
2021, https://www.bl.uk/people/geert-hofstede.
::::

:::: {#rf-040 .note}
::: title
:::

40\.

Heather M. Coon and Markus Kemmelmeier, "Cultural Orientations in the
United States: (Re)Examining Differences among Ethnic Groups,"

Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology

32, no. 3 (May 2001), 348--364,
https://doi.org/10.1177/0022022101032003006.
::::

:::: {#rf-041 .note}
::: title
:::

41\.

Monica Anderson, "Racial and Ethnic Differences in How People Use Mobile
Technology," Pew Research Center, April 30, 2015,
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/04/30/racial-and-ethnic-differences-in-how-people-use-mobile-technology/.
::::

:::: {#rf-042 .note}
::: title
:::

42\.

Juliana Menasce Horowitz, "Americans' Views on Masculinity Differ by
Party, Gender and Race," Pew Research Center, January 23, 2019,
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/01/23/americans-views-on-masculinity-differ-by-party-gender-and-race/.
::::

:::: {#rf-043 .note}
::: title
:::

43\.

"Country Comparison," Hofstede Insights, last modified June 21, 2021,
https://www.hofstede-insights.com/country-comparison/china,japan,south-korea,vietnam/.
::::

:::: {#rf-044 .note}
::: title
:::

44\.

Geert Hofstede, Gert Jan Hofstede, and Michael Minkov,

Cultures and Organizations: Software of the Mind

, 3rd ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2010).
::::

:::: {#rf-045 .note}
::: title
:::

45\.

"Working with Cultural Differences," Our Thinking, Change Factory,
accessed October 30, 2021,
https://www.changefactory.com.au/our-thinking/articles/working-with-cultural-differences/.
::::

:::: {#rf-048 .note}
::: title
:::

48\.

Opal Tomashevska, "6 Key Differences Drive Multicultural Consumer
Behavior," CCUL Headlines, Carolinas Credit Union League, November 13,
2018,
https://www.carolinasleague.org/news/426658/6-key-differences-drive-multicultural-consumer-behavior.htm.
::::

:::: {#rf-049 .note}
::: title
:::

49\.

Tomashevska, "6 Key Differences."
::::

# 

culture

objective and subjective elements like social norms, beliefs, behaviors,
accomplishments, customs, arts, language, foods, and skills that
characterize a particular group of individuals' way of life
