m00048

d32da943-bd4c-4285-824b-3b84b76f61bd

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Describe the Hispanic, Black, and Asian identities.

Define acculturation.

Explain how identity-related characteristics and factors connect
Hispanic, Black, and Asian consumers.

Describe how to market to Hispanic, Black, and Asian consumers.

# Hispanic, Black, and Asian Consumer Identities {#sect-00002}

The United States is a mixture of nationalities, backgrounds, cultures,
and identities. This mixture has been shaped through many decades of
immigration from people across many lands and by their interactions with
their new environments. The US population is often referred to as
consisting of majority and minority groups. The majority consists of
non-Hispanic White people. The minority consists of other races,
ethnicities, and communities. From a marketing standpoint, companies
have historically treated the majority segment as the mainstream market.
Conversely, the minority segment has been treated as a subgroup of
consumers, or the multicultural market.

As you read earlier in the chapter, the demographics of the United
States continue to change, and the majority segment will cease to exist
in the future. The country is expected to become a "plurality nation" by
2050. This means that no group will have a *sizeable* majority. The
non-Hispanic White population is projected to remain the largest single
group. However, the majority position will be lost in terms of
population percentage. Check out [\#](#) again to compare the
overarching segments.

## Hispanic Identity {#sect-00003}

Let's examine the data from the 2020 US Census to better understand
Hispanic consumers. The Hispanic population reached over 63 million
people in 2020. Is this number significant? Yes, because it means that
one out of every five people in the United States is Hispanic or of
Hispanic descent. This is a 23 percent growth since the previous census!
In fact, the Hispanic population has grown significantly in the last
four decades. The Hispanic population is projected to reach almost 100
million individuals by 2050.

Hispanic people are not a uniform group or single ethnicity. On the
contrary, the Hispanic population in the United States is very diverse.
Hispanic people originate from 20 different countries, as shown in
[\#](#), and can belong to any race. An overwhelming 83 percent of the
Hispanic population belongs to just five subethnicities. These subgroups
are Mexican (62.2 percent), Puerto Rican (9.5 percent), Cuban (3.9
percent), Salvadoran (3.9 percent), and Dominican (3.5 percent). The
rest of the population is made up of the other 15 Hispanic
subethnicities.

You are probably familiar with the terms *Hispanic*, *Latino/Latina*,
and *Latinx*. They are often used interchangeably but can have different
meanings. *Hispanic* is a language-based term that describes individuals
from a Spanish-speaking country. *Latino/Latina* is a location-based
term that identifies gendered individuals whose families originate in
Latin America regardless of the language they speak. For example, a
person from Spain is considered Hispanic because of language but not
Latino because of location. A person from Brazil is considered
Latino/Latina because of location but not Hispanic because of language
(Brazilians speak Portuguese). Unlike *Latino/Latina*, the term *Latinx*
is gender neutral. While *Latinx* has picked up momentum among some
groups, many Hispanic people dislike the word or find it offensive.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Many cultures integrate traditions in their lives as the generations
progress. Hispanic people demonstrate this same movement of traditions,
from their countries and cultures of origin into their family practices
in the United States. Why is that? It has to do with identity. Identity
is a person's self-image. Cultural identity, in particular, is how a
person identifies with a given culture, ethnicity, or social group. It
is a sense of belonging that influences personal thinking and actions.

For the majority of Hispanic people, identity is strongly linked to
heritage or to their family's country of origin. Customs and social
practices are strong components as well. To increase its connection with
these consumers, Target (see [\#](#)) appealed to the Hispanic identity
with its *sobremesa* commercial. The *sobremesa* is the additional time
spent at the dinner table with friends and family after a big meal for
relaxing or having meaningful conversations. This Hispanic tradition
does not have a direct translation in terms of American culture. Target
created the hashtag *#SinTraducción* for the campaign, which means
"without translation" to further emphasize this. Target also used "There
will always be a part of you that simply doesn't translate" as the
slogan for social media outreach. The commercial is part of the
retailer's first campaign ever aimed directly at Hispanic millennials.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
Target "Sobremesa" Commercial
:::

Target's "Sobremesa" commercial shows an entire Hispanic family sitting
at the table clearly *after* the meal has ended to share desserts and
enjoy fun conversation as a group.

[Target Sobremesa #SinTraduccion AVO](#)
::::

## Black Identity {#sect-00004}

Black people are the second largest multicultural group in the United
States after Hispanic people. Let's consider the statistics from the
2020 US Census again. The Black population shows growth at 46.8 million
people in 2020 versus 38.9 million people a decade earlier. Black
consumers make up 14.2 percent of the country's total inhabitants.
Another key point is that individuals who identify as Black in
combination with another race have increased 88.7 percent since the last
census. This "in combination" trend is not unique to the Black
community; the "in combination" identification accounted for the
majority of the changes in all the racial categories.

This multicultural segment shows a couple of other interesting changes
that impact consumer and consumption behaviors. For example, Black
consumers are forecasted to account for 15--17 percent of the total
population growth in the nation over the next decade. Black people have
also had the largest change in education level in recent years. Since
the 2010 census, the percentage of Black people with an undergraduate
degree has increased by more than 55 percent.

While Black people account for 14.2 percent of the population, this
segment makes up just under 10 percent of spending on goods and
services. This is because Black workers earn a lower median income than
other demographics. However, this inequity in spending and wealth is
showing signs of moving toward a better balance. The growing Black
population is estimated by management consulting firm McKinsey to
represent over \$300 billion per year in unmet demand.

A 2019 survey by the Pew Research Center shows that nearly 75 percent of
Black people believe that race is at the center of their identity. Race
is deeply tied to how people perceive themselves. When it comes to
defining the Black identity further, the community is also facing a
unique challenge. There is a growing argument in the United States over
differences between Black people who emigrated from Africa and those who
did not. The debate is caused by the ancestral link to slavery that many
American-born Black people have but immigrants do not. Plus, Black
people can also have other subethnicities such as Black Hispanic and
multiracial (White, Asian, or Native American). While the subethnicities
may not be physically visible, marketers need to be aware that identity
differences can be significant among the Black population.

These multicultural consumers also feel relatively well connected to the
broader Black community and prioritize social activities that offer
support to the group as a whole. To show solidarity with the BLM
movement, popular ice cream brand Ben & Jerry's (see [\#](#)) named one
of its flavors "Justice ReMix'd" to raise awareness of racism and
criminal justice reform. The company worked with the Advancement Project
national office to advocate for social change and civil rights. Ben &
Jerry's also enacted a multipoint corporate plan challenging other
companies to champion the cause and join the conversation about racial
inequalities.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

## Asian Identity {#sect-00005}

The Asian population in the United States has also increased since the
last census. This growth has been fueled largely by foreign-born
individuals. There were 19.9 million people in 2020 who identified as
single-race Asians. This number is up from 14.7 million a decade
earlier. There were also 4.1 million people in 2020 who identified
primarily as Asian "in combination" with another race. In fact, this
combination of single race and mixed race increased a whopping 55.5
percent from 2010 to 2020, making it one of the fastest-growing
demographic segments. Overall, the Asian population in the United States
is 24 million individuals, which is 7.2 percent of the total country's
inhabitants. The US Census Bureau projects this multicultural community
to more than double by 2060.

Like the Hispanic population, the Asian population is very diverse too.
[\#](#) shows the 22 different subethnicities that make up these
multicultural consumers. Did you know that six of these origin groups
account for 85 percent of the total Asian American community? These
groups derive from the Asian continent and the Indian subcontinent.
These origin groups are Chinese (24 percent), Indian (21 percent),
Filipino (19 percent), Vietnamese (10 percent), Korean (9 percent), and
Japanese (7 percent). The remainder of the Asian people come from Native
Hawaiian, Pacific Islander, and other subgroups.

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

The geographic distribution of this population is worth noting. There
are over 9.8 million Asian people living in the western region of the
country. This is nearly half the entire Asian population! Plus, almost
one-third of Asian consumers live in California alone, making Asians one
of the state's largest population segments. The southern states have the
second largest Asian population with 5.3 million individuals. Overall,
Asian people are projected to be the largest source of immigrants by
2055, accounting for 36 percent of all immigration, followed by Hispanic
people at 34 percent.

As an immigrant group, Asian people have the fastest adoption rate of
the English language. Almost 75 percent of Asian households speak
English, and nearly two-thirds of American-born Asians speak English
only. Asian people are also more likely than the average American
household to live in a multigenerational setting. Because of their
diversity and unique characteristics, it is difficult to narrow it down
to a uniform Asian identity. This poses a challenge for marketers.
Creating generalized messages for Asian people or having a "one size
fits all" marketing approach is unwise. Plus, making assumptions about
consumers' purchasing behaviors as a singular market can be very tricky,
if not inadvisable, because there is not a sole Asian cultural identity.

A 2019 survey about race found that 56 percent of Asian people said race
was a key part of their identity. Using this insight, Nike created two
different---but very effective---commercials targeting different
subsegments of Asian consumers. Nike's "The Great Chase" is inspired by
the longtime Chinese tradition of gifting money in little red envelopes.

:::: {#note-00014 .note}
::: title
Nike
:::

Check out the "Great Chase" commercial and compare it to the upbeat "Da
Da Ding" commercial featuring Indian women practicing many types of
sports.

[YouTube Video](#)
::::

# The Acculturation Spectrum {#sect-00006}

People who immigrate to the United States from another country will
probably experience some personal level of acculturation. Even
American-born multicultural individuals whose families speak another
language at home besides English may also experience acculturation.
Acculturation is the process by which a person's family cultural
patterns change because of direct and constant contact with a different
culture. Acculturation can happen in various degrees. The spectrum
ranges from complete adoption to total rejection of the new culture.
Individuals that simultaneously merge both cultures in daily life are
considered bicultural.

Hispanic and Asian consumers can experience various degrees of
acculturation. This depends on birthplace, immigration status, community
connections, and personal comfort level. For instance, a person born in
the United States to immigrant parents is more likely to be acculturated
than unacculturated. For marketers, being aware of acculturation levels
is important because they play a significant role in how these
multicultural consumers respond to marketing messages. Here is another
example. Hispanic people in general think of language as a tool to
preserve the culture. As a result, unacculturated Hispanic consumers are
more likely than acculturated consumers to support a brand that
advertises to them in the Spanish language. This effort is seen as a
sign of respect and appreciation.

# Identity-Connecting Characteristics and Factors {#sect-00007}

The Hispanic, Black, and Asian populations each have a general set of
cultural characteristics based on their multicultural identities. Being
aware of each segment's personal characteristics helps marketers create
effective marketing promotions and advertisements. In addition to
internal characteristics, these consumers are also influenced by
external factors such as social circumstances and market behaviors.
Let's explore characteristics and factors in more detail.

## Hispanic Consumers {#sect-00008}

Hispanic consumers in general are optimistic, family-oriented,
warmhearted, and hospitable. The culture's energy and liveliness are
visible through elements like music, food, decor, and language. Hispanic
people place a high value on relationships and social interactions. Have
you noticed that some commercials aimed at Hispanic consumers show
people in close proximity, touching, or hugging? Physical contact is
important to this multicultural segment. It is seen as a way to build
trust and group harmony. Did you notice it in Target's *sobremesa*
commercial?

Hispanic consumers support brands that demonstrate cultural
authenticity, transparency, and honesty. After all, openness and having
meaningful connections are at the heart of these consumers' values. In
terms of factors, the concept of product quality and service quality is
deeply desirable to Hispanic consumers. Have you heard of Hispanic
actress Jessica Alba? Alba, who is of Mexican descent, founded The
Honest Company (see [\#](#)) in 2012 with the mission of formulating
safe, high-quality personal and beauty products for the family. Other
factors that influence Hispanic consumers include companies' pledges to
sustainability and social responsibility. Indeed, these are growing
concerns that shape this community's purchasing behaviors.

<figure id="fig-00005">

</figure>

## Black Consumers {#sect-00009}

Two noteworthy characteristics of Black consumers in general are
determination and self-expression. As you read earlier in the chapter,
race is a key component of the Black identity. The social, educational,
and economic struggles that Black people have faced because of racial
discrimination and injustice have made these consumers highly determined
to pursue their dreams regardless of the obstacles encountered.
Self-expression is also a significant cultural trait. It is a way to
show personal pride in one's identity. Among Black consumers,
self-expression is typically conveyed through fashion, music, sports,
and the arts.

Like Hispanic consumers, Black people are optimistic and resilient.
Strong community bonds, observance of religious practices, and deep
commitments to social activism are factors closely linked to Black
consumers' identities. The opportunity to raise a collective voice about
key issues is a fueling factor too. In 2020, Beats by Dre launched the
"You Love Me" campaign (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00006">

</figure>

:::: {#note-00018 .note}
::: title
Beats by Dr. Dre
:::

Beats is a leading manufacturer of audio products cofounded by Black
rapper Dr. Dre. The two-minute commercial plays on the audio pun and
challenges viewers to emotionally listen by asking the question "You
love Black culture, but do you love me?"

[Beats by Dr Dre Presents You Love Me](#)
::::

## Asian Consumers {#sect-00010}

Asian cultures are steeped in rich traditions and customs. Asian
consumers are very proud of their heritage, and at the same time, they
identify well with the American culture. Asian people share this
cultural duality characteristic with Hispanic people. Cultural duality
is not the same thing as acculturation. Cultural duality happens when an
individual's cultures overlap with each other and the person feels a
sense of belonging to both simultaneously. Did you know that almost 50
percent of Asian consumers in the United States watch TV in both English
and in an Asian language? This helps them stay current with American
culture while keeping connected with their native culture.

Shared societal values are a trait that influence people's behaviors.
One of these is collectivism. Think about Hofstede's cultural
dimensions, individualism versus collectivism in particular.
Collectivism places more emphasis on group activities than on individual
ones. Overall, Asian societies are collectivistic, though the degree of
collectivism varies among the populations' countries of origin. Cultural
celebrations are also a factor linked to identity. Instacart, Target,
Wells Fargo, and Toyota are just a few companies marketing to Asian
consumers in the United States using traditional festivities like Diwali
and Lunar New Year to appeal to the group's collectivism.

:::: {#note-00021 .note}
::: title
Asian Celebrations
:::

Two examples posted on social media platforms are [Wells Fargo's Happy
Lunar New Year on Instagram](#) and [Toyota's Diwali tweet on
Twitter](#).
::::

# Marketing to Hispanic, Black, and Asian Consumers {#sect-00011}

As you have seen, marketing to each of these multicultural segments is
unique. Marketers must do the research and understand the demographics,
cultures, identities, and group characteristics of these targeted
consumers. It is also equally important to recognize that none of these
elements are static. They are dynamic and interact with one another.

Being successful with multicultural marketing, and ultimately with
diversity marketing, includes many factors. Success also requires
connecting with each consumer segment on a personal and intimate level.
This inevitably means that marketers must recognize the similarities and
differences between the cultural identities that shape daily life
experiences in the United States.

In the upcoming decades, the meaning of the terms *minority* and
*majority* segments are going to wane in significance. Groups that have
been historically classified as the minority market are going to grow,
while the group historically classified as the majority is going to
shrink in size. This is setting the stage for a future of a "plurality
nation," further emphasizing the importance of multicultural trends and
diversity marketing.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00012}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00013}

:::: {#rf-050 .note}
::: title
:::

50\.

"US Census Bureau Projections Show a Slower Growing, Older, More Diverse
Nation a Half Century from Now," Newsroom, United States Census Bureau,
December 12, 2012,
https://www.census.gov/newsroom/releases/archives/population/cb12-243.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-051 .note}
::: title
:::

51\.

Luis Noe-Bustamante, "Key Facts about US Hispanics and Their Diverse
Heritage," Pew Research Center, September 16, 2019,
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/09/16/key-facts-about-u-s-hispanics/.
::::

:::: {#rf-052 .note}
::: title
:::

52\.

Paul Taylor et al., "When Labels Don't Fit: Hispanics and Their Views of
Identity," Pew Research Center, April 4, 2012,
https://www.pewresearch.org/hispanic/2012/04/04/when-labels-dont-fit-hispanics-and-their-views-of-identity/.
::::

:::: {#rf-053 .note}
::: title
:::

53\.

Nicholas Jones et al., "Improved Race and Ethnicity Measures Reveal US
Population Is Much More Multiracial," America Counts: Stories behind the
Numbers, United States Census Bureau,
https://www.census.gov/library/stories/2021/08/improved-race-ethnicity-measures-reveal-united-states-population-much-more-multiracial.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-054 .note}
::: title
:::

54\.

Christine Tamir, "Key Findings about Black America," Pew Research
Center, March 25, 2021,
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2021/03/25/key-findings-about-black-america/.
::::

:::: {#rf-055 .note}
::: title
:::

55\.

Michael Chui et al., "A \$300 Billion Opportunity: Serving the Emerging
Black American Consumer,"

McKinsey Quarterly

, August 6, 2021,
https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/diversity-and-inclusion/a-300-billion-dollar-opportunity-serving-the-emerging-black-american-consumer.
::::

:::: {#rf-056 .note}
::: title
:::

56\.

Amanda Barroso, "Most Black Adults Say Race Is Central to Their Identity
and Feel Connected to a Broader Black Community," Pew Research Center,
February 5, 2020,
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2020/02/05/most-black-adults-say-race-is-central-to-their-identity-and-feel-connected-to-a-broader-black-community/.
::::

:::: {#rf-057 .note}
::: title
:::

57\.

Jones et al., "Race and Ethnicity Measures."
::::

:::: {#rf-058 .note}
::: title
:::

58\.

Budiman and Ruiz, "Key Facts."
::::

:::: {#rf-059 .note}
::: title
:::

59\.

Budiman and Ruiz, "Key Facts."
::::

:::: {#rf-060 .note}
::: title
:::

60\.

Budiman and Ruiz, "Key Facts."
::::

:::: {#rf-061 .note}
::: title
:::

61\.

Barroso, "Most Black Adults."
::::

:::: {#rf-062 .note}
::: title
:::

62\.

Maria Gomez Albrecht, "The Effect of Bicultural Acculturation among
Hispanic Consumers' Attitudes and Its Implications for Mobile
Advertising" (PhD diss., Swiss Management Center University, 2020),
unpublished.
::::

:::: {#rf-063 .note}
::: title
:::

63\.

Gomez Albrecht, "Effect of Bicultural Acculturation."
::::

:::: {#rf-064 .note}
::: title
:::

64\.

Pew Hispanic Center, "Life Satisfaction, Priorities and Values," in

Between Two Worlds: How Young Latinos Come of Age in America

(Washington, DC: Pew Research Center, December 2009),
https://www.pewresearch.org/hispanic/2009/12/11/vii-life-satisfaction-priorities-and-values/.
::::

:::: {#rf-065 .note}
::: title
:::

65\.

Nielsen,

Asian-Americans: Culturally Diverse and Expanding Their Footprint; The
Asian-American Consumer 2016 Report

, May 2016,
https://www.nielsen.com/insights/2016/asian-americans-culturally-diverse-and-expanding-their-footprint/.
::::

:::: {#rf-066 .note}
::: title
:::

66\.

Kathleen Y. Kawamura, "Body Image among Asian Americans," in

Encyclopedia of Body Image and Human Appearance

, ed. Thomas F. Cash (Waltham, MA: Academic Press, 2012), 2:95--102.
::::

# 

acculturation

the process by which a person's family cultural patterns change because
of direct and constant contact with a different culture

cultural duality

characteristic of a multicultural individual for whom cultures overlap
with each other and the person feels a sense of belonging to both at the
same time

cultural identity

how a person identifies with a given culture, ethnicity, or social
group, which instills a sense of belonging that influences personal
thinking and actions
