m00051

e10038bb-db9a-4e4e-b70b-3616292f6a5d

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define sociodemographic marketing.

Explain how to market to the LGBTQIA+ community.

Explain how to market based on generational differences.

Explain how to market to consumers with disabilities.

Describe how sociodemographic trends will impact future marketing.

# Sociodemographic Marketing {#sect-00002}

As defined earlier in the chapter, sociodemographics is the combination
of two distinct factors---social and demographic---within a given
population. This combination results in a set of quantifiable variables
for narrowing down customers in a large market. Social variables can be
quite literally *anything* with which people identify. In other words,
social variables are associated with identity. Because of that, they can
include racial and ethnic identities too. Social variables are broad and
can feel loosely defined. However, it is this unstructured nature that
often provides important insights for marketers. Demographic variables,
on the other hand, are more specific or have precise descriptions. These
include things like gender, age or generation, religion, marital status,
income, employment, education, political affiliation, disability, and
more.

As you have already read, sociodemographic marketing is a subcategory of
diversity marketing (refer back to [\#](#)). It intentionally targets
certain audiences with attractive advertising and promotions based on
shared social and demographic variables. Overlaying these two factors
has several worthwhile benefits for marketers. One of them, for
instance, is that it makes it easier to detect market trends and
shopping patterns based on a large number of consumers with variables in
common. Such findings are indispensable for marketers to gauge the
financial and emotional impact of their marketing efforts.

Another benefit is that sociodemographic marketing creates valuable
opportunities for reaching historically underrepresented individuals or
underserved communities. This outreach is significant because it
demonstrates companies' commitments toward a more diverse and inclusive
market. Sociodemographic marketing also enables marketers to adapt
products, services, and messaging to be more effective for both
businesses and consumers.

# Marketing to the LGBTQIA+ Community {#sect-00003}

The LGBTQIA+ population is composed of consumers who express a diversity
of gender identities, preferences, and sexual orientations. The acronym
stands for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer/questioning,
intersex, and asexual. The plus sign (+) represents other sexual
identities as well as allies who are not LGBTQIA+ members but support
the community's cause. The acronym has evolved over the decades to
become more inclusive and capture diverse relationships, expressions,
and identities.

The LGBTQIA+ community in the United States is growing. In 2012, only
3.5 percent of Americans self-identified as LGBTQIA+. American analytics
company Gallup shows this number increasing to 5.6 percent in 2020 (see
[\#](#)). Did you know that one in six adults in Generation Z (born
between 1997 and 2012) identifies as LGBTQIA+? This indicates a growth
trend reaching toward 16 percent in the future as other generations age
out.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

You might be wondering what is driving this growth. Some of it is
attributed to greater confidence in both societal acceptance and in the
ability to find support within the LGBTQIA+ community itself.
Sociologists and psychologists have known for a long time that a sense
of belonging, whether to a family or a social group, is essential for
normal and optimal human functioning. Therefore, the growth of the
LGBTQIA+ community is also partly the result of this human need to
belong. Plus, it is driven by a political and sociological need to be
represented and treated fairly as well.

For marketers, focusing on the societal experience around belonging
(acceptance, welcoming, support, and inclusion) is key for reaching the
growing number of LGBTQIA+ consumers. Global furniture giant IKEA (see
[\#](#)) understands this very well. In 2021, IKEA promoted the
#ProgressIsMade campaign in the United States during the entire month of
June. The campaign featured rainbow-themed products like carrying bags
and an audio speaker cover. IKEA donated up to \$50,000 in proceeds from
these limited-edition products to LGBTQIA+ nonprofit organization GLSEN.
In Canada, IKEA displayed at select stores 10 different love seats as
concept art inspired by Pride flags to increase its support for
inclusion during Pride month.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
IKEA Loveseats
:::

Learn more about the IKEA love seat collection and see the designs by
reading these articles:

Insider

Newswire

NBC News

Muse by Clio
::::

What can marketers do to be more successful in advertising to LGBTQIA+
consumers? Consider the following steps. First, review the company's
values and have an open and honest conversation with leadership about
authentic support of the LGBTQIA+ community. After all, genuine care and
inclusiveness are the base for all marketing efforts. Second, establish
guidelines on how to speak with and about the LGBTQIA+ community. This
means the words, tone, imagery, and core messaging of marketing
communications. Third, find experts to provide advice and insights into
the community. This reduces the possibility of unknowingly offending
this consumer segment. Plus, using group members for brainstorming and
evaluation is extremely helpful too. Fourth, test and verify that
products, services, and messaging are perceived as designed.

# Marketing to the Generations {#sect-00004}

Age is a frequently used demographic statistic for segmenting
populations. Age is also expressed or compared in terms of generational
groups. This approach enables marketers to capture a larger number of
consumers by grouping them into defined categories.

You read earlier in the chapter about these categories: Silent
Generation, baby boomers, Generation X, millennials, Generation Z, and
Generation Alpha. [\#](#) shows these generations based on their
percentage among the American population. Think about this. A member of
Generation Alpha (people born between 2010 and 2025) is born every *nine
seconds* in the United States. This generation is expected to account
for 2 billion individuals worldwide by 2025! Grouping consumers into
generational segments helps maximize marketing efforts and reach a
larger portion of the total market.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

It is crucial for marketers to keep in mind that each generation has
unique life experiences built on social, economic, and political
dynamics associated with their formative years. These experiences
influence each generation's views and values, which subsequently impact
their behaviors as consumers. Let's consider Generation Z and Generation
Alpha again. Members of both generations are highly technologically
literate. They have also been directly impacted by the COVID-19
pandemic's aftermath in terms of remote learning and reduced
face-to-face interactions. Consequently, this "lockdown generation" has
spent more time engaged with social media and virtual environments.
Marketers need to consider how such situations will influence these
generations' shopping behaviors and consumption patterns.

There are many factors that can be combined with a generational view of
consumers. One of the more useful for marketers to keep in mind is
economic influence. [\#](#) shows the wealth distribution by generation
in the United States as of 2020. This chart tells a significant story.

Until 2008, the Silent Generation and earlier generations controlled a
relatively equal amount of wealth. Two primary factors gradually shrunk
the amount of wealth of these consumers: natural mortality and the 2008
recession. Conversely, the wealth of baby boomers grew. In fact, many
have said that the Boomer Generation is the wealthiest generation to
have ever lived. Generation X's wealth started to grow in 2015, but the
ability of this generation to build riches has slowed down compared to
preceding generations. Millennials' wealth building appears to be even
slower (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

What does this mean? Wealth and income level play a role in people's
spending decisions, so marketers need to understand how it is shaped by
generational groups. Here are some steps to consider to be more
successful in advertising to consumers based on their generations.
First, use deeper and more extensive combinations of sociodemographic
variables. Grouping by generation alone is likely not enough. Adding
another variable such as income, education, or social markers may prove
useful. Second, use focus groups and individuals who fit the target
group to provide direct input and ideas. Third, consider adapting the
marketing communication to fit the norms of each generation. Fourth,
test and verify that products, services, and messaging are perceived as
designed.

# Marketing to Consumers with Disabilities {#sect-00005}

Americans with disabilities make up a much larger segment of the market
than you might realize. There are approximately 61 million Americans
with disabilities. That number is over 18 percent of the total
population of the United States. When the word *disability* is used,
many people usually visualize a mobility difficulty like having trouble
walking or climbing stairs. However, as seen in [\#](#), functional
mobility makes up less than a third of the different types of
disabilities. Other forms include cognitive or neurological, autonomous
living, and sensory related. This makes consumers with disabilities a
very diverse group too.

<figure id="fig-00005">

</figure>

Disability is more frequent in adults over the age of 65 and in women.
Among racial and ethnic segments, it is more common in non-Hispanic,
Native American, and Alaskan Native people. Adults living with a
disability are also more likely to be obese, smoke, have heart disease,
and have diabetes. While disabilities are very often important and
impactful aspects of people\'s lives, people with disabilities have many
defining characteristics, goals, needs, and identities.

How can marketers best reach consumers with disabilities? By using an
approach that ensures the company's efforts express humanity,
authenticity, and inclusivity. Let's look at a couple of examples. In
January 2019, a picture from a bridal boutique's window display went
viral due to its powerful inclusivity message. The display showed a
mannequin in a wheelchair dressed in a wedding gown. In February 2022,
Hispanic model Sofia Jirau made history as the first person with Down
syndrome to become a model for Victoria's Secret. These examples
demonstrate that people with disabilities are not only part of our
social fabric but also are an integral part of the overall market.

Other suggestions for marketers consist of ensuring that disabilities
are properly represented. This means consulting or hiring individuals
who have a disability rather than using actors or models who do not.
Marketers also need to keep in mind how disabilities affect marketing
communications. In other words, think about closed captioning on videos
or the use of alternative text on images for websites. The types of
disabilities are diverse, so marketing initiatives have to be diverse as
well. That is what makes sociodemographic marketing a subset of
diversity marketing.

# Developing Sociodemographic Trends and Their Future Impact {#sect-00006}

Discovering sociodemographic trends takes an enormous amount of study.
To do an effective job, marketing researchers are constantly working
with a multitude of variables. They set parameters, collect data,
analyze it, and come up with ideas based on results. This work is done
repeatedly over time. It is precisely the extended time frame that
enables marketing researchers to see market patterns surface. Let's
check out some current trends that will have a future impact for
companies and marketers in general.

## Population Stagnation {#sect-00007}

The population has been growing around the world at historically
unprecedented rates for many years now. Yet, there are several sources
claiming that it will decline globally around the middle of the 21st
century. The United States has already been in a relatively steady
population growth decline---or population stagnation---according to
trends from the US Census Bureau. In fact, the American growth rate has
slowed to its lowest point in over 120 years. If this trend continues,
the United States will see its first net population decrease in the next
couple of years.

Marketers need to consider the sociodemographic factors that are
contributing to this trend: births, deaths, and international migration.
No doubt COVID-19 has impacted the death rate, which was already being
fueled by the growth deceleration from years earlier. [\#](#)
illustrates the population changes in the United States through 2021
based on some of these factors. The rapid percent change in 2020 and
2021 is probably due to the pandemic's effect.

<figure id="fig-00006">

</figure>

## Consumer Spending Dominated by Baby Boomers {#sect-00008}

While this is not a new trend, it is certainly one that will continue
through the 2030s as the baby boomer population ages out. The American
Association for Retired Persons (AARP) reports that American workers
over 65 years of age have a median income of \$78,000 per year, while
workers under age 65 have a median income that is only \$55,000. Keep in
mind that this statistic is about individuals who are actively working,
meaning not yet retired. Couple it with the wealth accumulation
information you read about earlier. The baby boomer population certainly
exerts outsized economic and purchasing influence, making this an
important current and future market segment.

Understanding sociodemographic trends such as population growth and
decline as well as market consumption based on generational groups is
crucial for marketers to create relevant and effective marketing
campaigns in the growing age of marketplace diversity.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00009}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00010}

:::: {#rf-067 .note}
::: title
:::

67\.

Jones, "LGBT Identification."
::::

:::: {#rf-068 .note}
::: title
:::

68\.

"What Is Generation Alpha?,"

Casey Connects

(blog), The Annie E. Casey Foundation, November 4, 2020,
https://www.aecf.org/blog/what-is-generation-alpha.
::::

:::: {#rf-069 .note}
::: title
:::

69\.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, "Disability Impacts All."
::::

:::: {#rf-070 .note}
::: title
:::

70\.

The Lancet

, "World Population Likely to Shrink after Mid-century, Forecasting
Major Shifts in Global Population and Economic Power," ScienceDaily,
July 15, 2020,
https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/07/200715150444.htm.
::::

:::: {#rf-071 .note}
::: title
:::

71\.

Luke Rogers, "US Population Grew 0.1% in 2021, Slowest Rate since
Founding of the Nation," America Counts: Stories behind the Numbers,
United States Census Bureau, December 21, 2021,
https://www.census.gov/library/stories/2021/12/us-population-grew-in-2021-slowest-rate-since-founding-of-the-nation.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-072 .note}
::: title
:::

72\.

AARP, "More Americans Working Past 65," April 22, 2019.
https://www.aarp.org/work/employers/americans-working-past-65/#:\~:text=The%20%2478%2C000%20average%20earnings%20for,in%201962%2C%20the%20report%20says.
::::
