m00052

57a0c2bb-d9f5-49a6-80f4-4766a8144cfa

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify the ethical issues related to diversity marketing.

Discuss how to address different consumer values to reduce issues in
marketing.

# Ethical Considerations in Marketing {#sect-00002}

The issues related to business ethics reside within society's
definitions and standards. Like with many topics, what is considered
ethical business behavior or an accepted practice today can change
tomorrow based on context. In other words, business ethics do not remain
fixed. Ethical standards transform and adapt in conjunction with changes
in the business environment.

Consider the following scenario. Let's say you are visiting the doctor
for your annual checkup. How would you feel if the doctor walked into
the exam room smoking a cigarette? Most people would have a negative
reaction to this. In most places in the United States, it is against
city ordinances to smoke indoors in public places unless it is a
designated smoking area. These ordinances are enforced because the
government recognizes that smoking is a health hazard. If your doctor
walked into the exam room with a cigarette, it would pose several
ethical concerns. However, did you know that until the 1950s, doctors
approved of smoking and even appeared in cigarette ads? By the
mid-1960s, the medical field developed clarity around the hazards of
smoking, and norms were changed in society and in advertising. [\#](#)
shows an advertisement making this point.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Where do business ethics come from? Ethics originate from the need and
desire to promote both fair and equitable competition in the market.
Ethics are supported by legislation such as the Sherman Antitrust Act
from the US Department of Justice. Ethical considerations in diversity
marketing have a similar background. They are linked to companies' fair
and equitable outreach and representation of diverse audiences in the
market. These include multicultural and sociodemographic consumer
segments in particular.

Business ethics shape companies' and employees' work behaviors,
corporate activities, and marketing efforts. This implies that ethics
are inseparable from a company's brand. Why? Because a brand is
essentially what a business stands for and what it represents. Consumers
associate certain characteristics and traits with a company's brand.
These expectations, in turn, influence purchasing actions. For this
reason, marketers need to take great care in creating an accurate
reflection of the company's ethics that are also culturally and socially
sound.

Ethics are often contextual, so it is important to recognize that values
and behaviors vary by culture, identity, and other demographic
variables. This means it is imperative to truly understand targeted
segments as thoroughly as possible. It is common for marketers to
research things like buying patterns, consumption sentiment, desired
features, and media efficacy. However, to succeed in a diverse
marketplace, research must extend deeper. It needs to be ethically based
on target segments' cultural sensitivities and social issues. Economic
fairness, political viewpoints, differences in technological access,
legal protections, and environmental risks should also be considered in
ethical marketing research.

# Ethical Issues in Diversity Marketing {#sect-00003}

One of marketing's primary functions is to reflect an organization's
business ethics and values to the marketplace and to consumers. This
must be done in an active and intentional manner. Marketers have a
responsibility to ensure that efforts and communications are honest,
balanced, and authentic to the company and to the marketing profession.
Creating awareness of cultural and social issues that impact ethical
practices is also a key function of diversity marketing.

## Cultural and Social Values {#sect-00004}

How messages are perceived and decoded in advertising is the most
publicly visible representation of a company's ethics, values, and
overall business culture. Marketers need to ensure that advertising
campaigns do not reinforce harmful stereotypes and unconscious biases.
This is not easy to do because, after all, cultural and social beliefs
are deeply seated. This explains why some biases are unconscious.

Stereotypes and unconscious biases are evident in every facet of life.
In fact, everybody has them. Cultural stereotypes and social biases are
common in advertising. Let's explore some situations. Asian people share
many cultural values and characteristics. As you have read, the Asian
population in the United States is comprised of 22 different countries
of origin. Red is considered a lucky color by most Asian people. When
advertising to Chinese consumers, it is typical to see the color red
used prominently. However, assuming that all Asian consumers feel the
same about this color is stereotyping. For Japanese people, green
symbolizes youth and vital energy; yellow is associated with vitality
and light for Korean people.

You may have seen ads that suggest that only boys or men play football
or maybe that only girls and women cook. These types of ads perpetuate
gender stereotypes. That's why campaigns like Procter & Gamble's
groundbreaking 2014 "Like a Girl" campaign challenged people's
stereotypes with its ads about what it means to do things as a female.
Here is yet another example. Radio advertisers could ignore baby boomers
in favor of millennials and Generation Z consumers. This bias is driven
by the incorrect assumption that baby boomers are not active radio
listeners, which is not true. Stereotypes and biases can cost companies
a lot of money in negative publicity and lost opportunities. From an
ethical perspective, biases can have unintended discriminatory results
among diverse consumer segments.

## Diversity Representation {#sect-00005}

Diversity marketing is about reaching a larger portion of the total
market by including diverse population segments such as multicultural
and sociodemographic audiences. Representation matters for a growing
number of consumers. While trying to be inclusive, marketers need to
steer clear of tokenism. Tokenism happens when an individual from either
a minority group or an underrepresented community is included in ads or
marketing communications to prevent criticism. Tokenism is a symbolic
act that gives the appearance of representation. However, it is not a
genuine desire to portray consumer diversity.

When it comes to ethical considerations such as advertisements'
diversity balance, the focus is on ensuring positive associations. This
inclusive balance is not limited to just people. It also applies to
terms, phrases, and other forms of communication. For instance, the
misuse of words or incorrect translations can inadvertently convey a
lack of sensitivity to multicultural or sociodemographic consumers.
Marketers may offend without intending to do so. As an example, as you
read earlier in the chapter, some terms can be disliked by ethnic
consumers.

Marketers need to intentionally consider every characteristic, factor,
and set of values that shape diversity and inclusivity. These need to be
weighed against the perceptions of each consumer segment. Doing a
thorough job of research, design, and review goes a long way to ensuring
a fair and equitable representation of all consumer segments.

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
Culturally Sensitive and Socially Inclusive Marketing
:::

Multinational industry leaders like Coca-Cola, Google, Adidas, Unilever,
AT&T, Marriott International, and Microsoft are just a few of the
companies that, like P&G, are focusing their marketing efforts on being
more culturally sensitive and socially inclusive. Even niche players,
partnerships, and private companies such as Bumble, Fenty Beauty, and
ThirdLove are also championing diversity as a core value through equal
cultural and sociodemographic representation rather than just chasing a
trend in marketing.

Consider Coca-Cola's long history of advertisements and promotions, for
example. In the early 1970s, Coca Cola released the "Hilltop" commercial
(also known as "I'd Like to Buy the World a Coke"), which showed people
from different races and cultures bonding over the beverage. In 2011,
the company launched the groundbreaking campaign "Share a Coke" in
Australia to connect with consumers in a personal way while influencing
product purchases. The campaign went viral and became a global success.

For the 2014 Super Bowl and the Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia,
Coca-Cola launched the "America Is Beautiful" campaign. Recognizing the
growth of multicultural consumers in the United States, the campaign's
commercial featured seven young bilingual American women singing in
different languages. It also showed culturally diverse consumers from
all walks of life. Although the campaign was subject to severe criticism
and sparked outrage and boycotts by some people, Coca-Cola was applauded
by others for its commitment to a more inclusive marketing
communication. That is what diversity marketing is all about.
::::

#  {#sect-00006}

Marketing reflects an organization's ethics and values as it
communicates, especially with current and prospective customers.
Marketers have learned to adjust over time to changes in the
marketplace, especially as technology, the environment, politics,
culture, and demographics have evolved and altered customer needs,
wants, and demands. This chapter introduces concepts primarily concerned
with culture and diversity and the need for businesses to focus more on
customer individuality than on customer commonality. Research shows that
companies that build emotional ties through diversity generate more
revenue, increase stock price performance, and enhance brand
perceptions.

Marketers must be constantly aware of demographic trends, especially in
multicultural identities, generational differences, consumers with
disabilities, and changes in spending. Ethics, too, transform and adapt
to the business environment. Ethical norms not only promote fair and
equitable competition, they also set standards for brand stewardship and
social responsibility.

Finally, the focus of many successful marketers today is to rely on
marketing intelligence to guide them toward establishing and maintaining
positive customer associations across population characteristics.

#  {#sect-00007}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00008}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00009}

Students who are building their résumés have always been encouraged to
set themselves apart from the competition for internships, jobs, and
volunteer experiences. In other words, focus on what makes you stand out
from other job seekers. If you are bilingual, why not prepare your
résumé, blog, or LinkedIn profile in both languages? Are you especially
knowledgeable in a particular area such as designing alternate reality
games? Do you collect comic books or baseball trading cards? All of
these interests, collections, and abilities not only have the potential
to create a dialogue with potential employers, but they also highlight
your heritage, lifestyle, or singularity to your advantage.

#  {#sect-00010}

Relatively few recent marketing graduates think about entering the
nonprofit arena. Some of the key positions in nonprofits include
marketing director, event coordinator, director of development,
communications specialist, and volunteer coordinator.

There are many nonprofit organizations operating in the United States
that strive to serve multicultural groups and sociodemographic
communities. Some have purposeful objectives like equitable rights and
inclusivity. Some national examples include Advancement Project,
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), Asian Americans Advancing Justice
(AAJC), Equal Justice Initiative (EJI), Human Rights Campaign
Foundation, League of United Latin American Citizens (LULAC), National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), National
Immigration Law Center, National Organization on Disability, National
Urban League, Prospanica, The Asian American Foundation (TAAF), The PhD
Project, and The Trevor Project.

Contact a local nonprofit organization and interview an employee filling
one of the above-mentioned roles. Questions may include:

What drew you to this organization?

What is its mission?

What groups or communities does it serve?

Does the position require specific training?

How many volunteers do you have, and what are their responsibilities and
time commitments?

Finally, consider whether volunteering for this organization may fulfill
you, add to your résumé, and/or bring you in contact with future
employees, colleagues, and friends.

#  {#sect-00011}

## Lineout {#sect-00012}

If 50 is the new 30, most 50-year-olds want to look 30. Consumers in
their twenties want to look like their favorite Hollywood star or
Instagram influencer. New methods, procedures, and products are flooding
the market to appeal to the market demand for better skin, reduced
facial wrinkles, and improved appearance. A big part of the market for
skin care products is dermal fillers. According to Fortune Business
Insights, the global dermal fillers market is projected to grow from
\$3.07 billion in 2021 to \$6.28 billion in 2028 at a compound annual
growth rate (CAGR) of 10.8 percent in the forecast period, 2021--2028.

Noninvasive and minimally invasive procedures for smoother and
younger-looking skin are rising in popularity among many different
demographic groups. Through facial fillers or digitally enhanced
photographs, many people are looking to improve their look. While most
consumers may not have the money or the willingness to undergo surgical
cosmetic procedures, many are very willing to take an alternate
route---receive an injection that may last 3, 6, or 12 months and
provide the appearance of younger-looking, smoother, line-free skin.

Looking to break into the market of dermal fillers and provide
excellence in the injection experience and outcome, Lineout jumped into
the market. The company didn't want to be a typical medical spa with a
wide breadth of services. Instead, it was looking to be a boutique
provider of an in-demand service done with excellence and provided
through a vast network of boutique locations nationwide.

Like the nail salon that only does nails, Lineout is a boutique that
focuses only on facial fillers. The boutique experience with niche
specialization was lacking in the industry. To provide facial injections
with precision and only do the best for its clients, Lineout had a
business model that could break into the market and be replicated
throughout the country.

While most medical spas market primarily to middle-aged women, Lineout
realized the market was much bigger and much more diverse than most
medical spas recognized. Consumers of various ages, genders, and
ethnicities were seeking facial fillers. Many of the medical spas were
set up to cater to the female market. With feminine-sounding names, pink
pastels, and soft floral graphics, the marketing was all focused toward
this one demographic.

Lineout purposefully structured its business to meet the needs of a more
diverse market. With simple graphics, a bright color palette, and
marketing promotion through various channels, Lineout was able to tap a
broader market.

The male audience skewed older. To meet the needs of men who were
wanting facial fillers, Lineout promotions included male-themed blogs,
promotions through barbershops, and digital advertising with business
and sports teams. For men "in the know," *lineout* is a rugby term.
Rugged men saw Lineout as a product for them as they stepped into the
facial filler's market.

On the opposite spectrum, young women had much different needs for
facial fillers. Younger women primarily wanted lips that looked like the
Kardashians and "line"-free foreheads, similar to what they were seeing
from favorite celebrities and Instagram influencers. Media choices for
women in their late teens and early twenties were primarily focused on
TikTok and Instagram along with some select YouTube channels and reality
shows. Lineout was able to connect with this audience by targeting
messaging specific to the bigger, beautiful lip craze.

And finally, the biggest and most obvious market was middle-aged women
who made facial fillers part of their skin care. Getting facial fillers
for this demographic was as regular as a teeth cleaning or appointment
with a hairstylist. Without hesitation, this market signed up for
regular appointments and memberships that provided discounts for
frequent and regularly scheduled sessions.

Lineout counted this demographic as its bread and butter. Demand from
this market segment is highest, and this consumer group is also the most
discerning. Without all the traditional services offered by medical
spas, Lineout had to ensure that the level of skill and the overall
results were superior to other services in the market. To reach this
market, Lineout created specific blogs to address the stated concerns
and needs. Lineout used Facebook and select digital channels to court
the older women seeking facial filler services.

While the marketing for each demographic is a bit different, the
services and the experience are similar for each of the company's market
segments. Men want specific things from their facial fillers, young
women want something different, and middle-aged women are even more
precise. Lineout provides for each diverse need while maintaining its
niche focus of only doing facial fillers.

Learn more about the company from [the Lineout website](#) and
[Instagram feed](#).

## Case Questions {#sect-00013}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00014}

:::: {#rf-073 .note}
::: title
:::

73\.

Jacob Olesen, "Color Meanings in Japan," Color Meanings, last modified
February 7, 2022, https://www.color-meanings.com/color-meanings-japan/;
Meong Jin Shin et al., "Colour Preferences for Traditional Korean
Colours,"

Journal of the International Colour Association

9 (2012): 48--59,
https://www.aic-color.org/resources/Documents/jaic_v9_05.pdf.
::::

:::: {#rf-074 .note}
::: title
:::

74\.

Nadra Nittle, "Brands Once Used Elitism to Market Themselves. Now
Inclusion Sells," The Goods by Vox, Vox Media, December 7, 2018,
https://www.vox.com/the-goods/2018/12/7/18129445/brands-inclusion-fenty-third-love-victorias-secret.
::::

:::: {#rf-075 .note}
::: title
:::

75\.

"What Was the 'Share a Coke' Campaign?," Coca-Cola Australia, Coca-Cola,
September 2, 2019,
https://www.coca-colacompany.com/au/faqs/what-was-the-share-a-coke-campaign.
::::

:::: {#rf-076 .note}
::: title
:::

76\.

Patrick Kevin Day, "Coca-Cola Super Bowl Ad Stirs Controversy,"

Los Angeles Times

, February 3, 2014,
https://www.latimes.com/entertainment/tv/showtracker/la-et-st-coca-cola-super-bowl-ad-stirs-controversy-20140203-story.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-077 .note}
::: title
:::

77\.

"Dermal Fillers Market Size, Growth and Revenue Analysis," Fortune
Business Insights, accessed September 26, 2021,
https://www.fortunebusinessinsights.com/industry-reports/dermal-fillers-market-100939.
::::

:::: {#rf-078 .note}
::: title
:::

78\.

"From Extreme to Mainstream: The Future of Aesthetics Injectables,"
McKinsey & Company Our Insights, December 20, 2021,
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/life-sciences/our-insights/from-extreme-to-mainstream-the-future-of-aesthetics-injectables
::::

:::: {#rf-079 .note}
::: title
:::

79\.

GQ Staff, "Are Dermal Fillers Getting Popular Among Men Today?" GQ
Grooming, September 28, 2021,
https://www.gqmiddleeast.com/gq-partnership/why-are-men-getting-dermal-fillers-now#
::::

# 

tokenism

the practice of including an individual from either a minority group or
an underrepresented community in marketing efforts simply as a symbol
