m00088

fd5d7a4f-c500-4e77-905b-6dbc31d24740

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Leo Burnett was a journalist for the *Peoria Times* in Illinois when he
decided to start his own advertising firm with the same name in 1935.
His strategies were fairly simple: to utilize models who looked like
ordinary people instead of Hollywood stars. His motto: "What helps
people, helps business." That strategy paid off big for Philip Morris
with the introduction of the iconic---albeit now considered
unethical---Marlboro Man. In 1952, the ageless Tony the Tiger cartoon
icon for Kellogg's Frosted Flakes was also born from the Leo Burnett ad
agency. Other notable companies that have utilized the Leo Burnett ad
agency include Procter & Gamble, McDonald's, and Fiat, to name just a
few.

Today, the company has offices around the globe, and it still prides
itself on aligning brands with human values. According the company, "Leo
Burnett was built on a simple belief. That the most creative, most
effective and most powerful work has people at its core---their needs,
wants, dreams and hopes. It's a belief that can be seen in action in
everything we make."

In July of 2021, Leo Burnett London released a new advertisement for
McDonald's---"Fancy a McDonald's?"---that showcases one of life's
simpler pleasures: laughter. It featured a television advertisement with
no dialogue, just some friends and family enjoying time together. The
advertisements, a big success, ultimately highlight Leo Burnett's
ability to reach a multitude of audiences across cultures and
generations.

:::: {#note-00005 .note}
::: title
Leo Burnett
:::

There is a lot to learn from the Leo Burnett advertising agency. [Check
out the agency's website](#) to see the various kinds of campaigns the
company has worked on. Be sure to check out the News section to read
about several campaigns.

Interested in the campaigns mentioned in this section? Check out these
websites:

Fancy a McDonald's laughter commercial

[Laughter \| Fancy A McDonald\'s \| McDonald\'s UK](#)

Kellogg's discussion about the

Tony the Tiger campaign

Food nonfiction's history of

Tony the Tiger

Video on the history of Tony the Tiger

[(1950s-1970s) Tony The Tiger Frosties Cereal Advert Compilation](#)
::::

# Endnotes {#sect-00001}

:::: {#rf-001 .note}
::: title
:::

1\.

Leo Burnett (website), accessed July 7, 2022, https://leoburnett.com/.
::::

:::: {#rf-002 .note}
::: title
:::

2\.

Leo Burnett.
::::

:::: {#rf-003 .note}
::: title
:::

3\.

Andrew Long, "'Fancy a McDonald's?' Serves Up Life's Simple Pleasures: A
Q&A with Andrew Long, Creative Director, Leo Burnett London," Leo
Burnett, October 15, 2021,
https://leoburnett.com/news/fancy-a-mcdonalds-serves-up-lifes-simple-pleasures-a-qa-with-andrew-long-creative-director-leo-burnett-london.
::::

:::: {#rf-004 .note}
::: title
:::

4\.

Leo Burnett.
::::
