m00089

2efa7eae-61a0-47c7-9534-3968c43e67f9

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define advertising and provide examples.

Discuss the importance of advertising in the promotion mix.

# Advertising and its Importance in the Promotion Mix {#sect-00002}

Marketers utilize a variety of ways---or media channels---to promote the
organization's offerings. Regardless of the media channel used,
marketers must be consistent in the communication they send to
customers.

Advertising is paid communication messages that identify a brand or
organization and is intended to reach a large number of recipients. The
most traditional media that are used for advertising include newspapers,
magazines, television, radio, Internet, and billboards (see [\#](#)).
The increase in the availability and use of the Internet and other
technology has also led organizations to advertise on mobile phones,
through email, on social media, and on other digital devices.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Like every promotion mix element and media channel, advertising has its
own advantages and disadvantages. Advertising is fairly expensive, so
the cost to the organization is high. However, advertising reaches a
large audience with one ad, so the cost per exposure is relatively low.
For example, just one 30-second commercial during the 2021 Super Bowl
cost companies around \$6 million. But with 96.4 million viewers, the
cost per exposure (assuming every viewer sees the commercial) is only
around 6 cents per viewer. Because advertising is nonpersonal and
reaches a large audience, the message can get distorted from the
marketer's intention to that of the audience. For this reason, it is
difficult to quickly change the message if it is misunderstood, and it
also difficult to capture how well the message was received.

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
Cost of Super Bowl Commercials over Time
:::

Super Bowl ads have a large following, and the expense has increased
each year. Check out [this article from *The Sporting News*](#) that
compares the cost of commercials from 1967 to 2022.
::::

## Product Advertisements {#sect-00003}

Product advertisements are those that promote a specific product within
the organization's product mix. These advertisements focus on a singular
product and intend to bring brand awareness to a product or to
differentiate the brand from competitors. In 2013, PepsiCo created a
print ad showing a can of Pepsi wearing a Coca-Cola cape, wishing the
audience a Happy Halloween. In 2020, Coca-Cola used the same
advertisement to counteract the original ad by stating: "Everyone wants
to be a hero!" Both are examples of product advertisements, cheekily
comparing two fiercely competing brands.

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
Pepsi versus Coke
:::

Brands roasting one another through advertisements is not something that
PepsiCo invented. It's been done many times. To see the Pepsi versus
Coke campaigns as well as other big brands roasting their competitors,
[check out this Bulldog article](#).
::::

## Institutional Advertisements {#sect-00004}

Unlike product advertisements that focus on one product or brand in an
organization's product mix, institutional advertisements focus on the
organization. This differs also from public relations---discussed
next---in that it is a paid form of communication. The goal of
institutional advertising is to create a positive image or support for
the entire organization. Institutional ads also have the advantage of
creating a positive impact by attracting potential candidates and
increasing employee engagement within the organization. At the start of
the COVID-19 pandemic, many companies stepped up to help mitigate the
effects the pandemic had on the country. Early on, Anheuser-Busch
switched some of its operations from distilling beer to making hand
sanitizer. In April 2020, just one month after the pandemic hit the
United States, the company had already delivered over 500,000 bottle of
hand sanitizer. The company utilized both print and television
advertisements to communicate its philanthropic efforts to consumers. It
wasn't trying to sell the public a Budweiser, but rather was using the
ads to help bolster its image to consumers.

# Importance of Advertising {#sect-00005}

While there has been a major increase in commercial-free television and
the ability to skip ads in multiple media platforms, advertising still
remains an important part of the promotion mix. Advertising assists in
consumer awareness---making sure the audience is aware of a product or
service and its benefits. Advertising also helps to retain customers
through reminders and can show audiences that a business aligns with
their values. However, with the increase in society's reluctance to
believe what they see in advertisements, it is more important than ever
that marketers ensure they are sending the right message at the right
time.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00006}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00007}

:::: {#rf-005 .note}
::: title
:::

5\.

Brian Steinberg, "NBC Seeks Record \$6 Million for Super Bowl
Commercials (Exclusive),"

Variety

, June 16, 2021,
https://variety.com/2021/tv/news/super-bowl-commercials-price-record-1234998593/.
::::

:::: {#rf-006 .note}
::: title
:::

6\.

Roger Riddell, "Coke Fan's Halloween Response to Pepsi Ad Goes Viral,"
Food Dive, Industry Dive, November 4, 2013,
https://www.fooddive.com/news/coke-fans-halloween-response-to-pepsi-ad-goes-viral/190208/.
::::

:::: {#rf-007 .note}
::: title
:::

7\.

"Anheuser-Busch Delivering More Than 5000,000 Bottles of Hand Sanitizer
for COVID-19 Relief Efforts," Newsroom, Anheuser-Busch, updated May 29,
2020,
https://www.anheuser-busch.com/newsroom/2020/04/anheuser-busch-delivering-hand-sanitizer-for-covid-19-relief-eff/.
::::

# 

advertising

paid communication messages that identify a brand or organization and
are intended to reach a large number of recipients

institutional advertisements

advertisements intended to create a positive image or support for an
entire organization

product advertisements

advertisements that promote a specific product within the organization's
product mix
