m00090

957baacc-f03f-4501-a3c8-a0575557a42d

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

List the steps involved in developing an advertising plan.

Describe the details involved in each step of advertising development.

Discuss methods for assessing and evaluating the advertising program.

# Major Advertising Decisions in an Advertising Plan {#sect-00002}

As with any successful plan, certain decisions need to be made while
creating an advertising plan. Advertising is expensive and should have
specific objectives with clear communication to the audience to ensure
the right message is being sent at the right time with the biggest
impact. These steps include choosing the objective(s), choosing a push
or pull strategy, establishing a budget, developing the strategy,
executing the program, and assessing the impact (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

## Establishing Advertising Objectives {#sect-00003}

The aim of advertising is to communicate something to an audience. The
objectives of such communication can vary depending on the goals of the
advertisement. Some common objectives of advertising include
information, persuasion, comparisons, and reminders. Let's explore each
of these types of advertising objectives in more detail.

### Informative Advertising {#sect-00004}

Informative advertising is most often used as a new product is being
introduced in the market. The goal of informative advertising is to
bring awareness to a product through educational communication to
increase demand for the product. A new product can only be successful if
people know it exists and why.

Specific messages of informative advertising will vary depending on the
product or service. A simple teaser of a new product is effective for
some products, while for others, more detailed information may be
necessary so the audience understands the product. For example, when the
newest iPhone is about to be launched, Apple often uses a short and
simple advertisement with only a photo of the phone and its available
date. For an existing brand such as Apple, this works well because
consumers are already familiar with the product's brand. Conversely,
when a brand-new product is brought to market that consumers may not be
aware of, more information may be necessary in the message.

### Persuasive Advertising {#sect-00005}

The goal of persuasive advertising is to convince consumers to purchase
by highlighting the benefits of a product or service being advertised.
Whereas informative advertising often uses facts and figures to
introduce a product, persuasive advertising often focuses more on the
emotions of the audience. For example, when an automobile company
advertises a brand of its SUV, it might include a scene with a family
and focus on the safety of the vehicle (see [\#](#)). This is an attempt
to showcase the benefits of the automobile to the consumer on an
emotional level.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

### Comparative Advertising {#sect-00006}

Comparative advertising's aim is to showcase the benefits and values of
one product over its competitors. Wendy's, a fast-food burger
establishment known for its "fresh never frozen" beef, has long used
comparative advertising to showcase its freshness over competitors,
particularly McDonald's---its biggest competitor. The marketing team at
Wendy's often uses humorous advertisements to compare its food with
competitors, and in recent years, the company has become known for its
humorous social media posts.

### Reminder Advertising {#sect-00007}

Reminder advertising is aimed at bringing a product back into the
forefront of the consumer's mind. Typically, reminder advertising is
used during the maturation stage of the product life cycle. For any
well-established brand, most advertisements are considered reminder
advertisements---unless the brand is introducing a new product or a
change to an existing product. McDonald's 2021 advertisements that
remind consumers to get their friends fries if they say they don't want
them is an example of reminder advertising, as the company is not
introducing a new product but rather reminding audiences that McDonald's
is there as a choice in fast food.

## Push Strategy versus Pull Strategy {#sect-00008}

After choosing an objective for the advertising plan, marketers must
determine whether a push or pull strategy will be most effective. A push
strategy is aimed at pushing the brand in front of an audience. Often a
push strategy will utilize multiple forms of advertising media so that
the product or service is in front of the consumer at multiple times.
Common push strategies involve sending postcards or emails and placing
ads in print and television media.

Conversely, a pull strategy is intended to bring audiences to the
product. For example, if a company is launching a new game app, the
company may choose to advertise in another game app. The interested
consumer would then click on the advertisement and be pulled into the
new product (app).

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
GameStop
:::

GameStop is a great example of a company with push and pull strategies.
[Check out its website for examples](#).
::::

## Establishing the Advertising Budget {#sect-00009}

The next step in the advertising decision process is establishing an
advertising budget. There are several approaches to this decision, but
it is important to keep in mind that the advertising budget is just one
component of the overall promotion budget. [\#](#) outlines the most
common approaches to budgeting.

  *Budget Approach*            *Definition*
  ---------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Percent of sales             Budgets are set as a percentage of prior years' sales or predicted future sales.
  All you can afford           Budgets are set after all other necessary expenditures have been covered in the organizational budget.
  Return on investment (ROI)   Budgets are set based on the expected return, in dollars, an advertising campaign will produce.
  Competitive parity           Budgets are set based on predications of what competitors will spend.
  Objective and task           Budgets are set based on the objectives set for activities planned.

  : Advertising Plan Budget {#table-00001}

Companies often use previous year (or period) data to set objectives for
the current or future years. Marketing budgets can use the same
approach. The percentage-of-sales approach utilizes prior years' sales
or predicted year's sales and sets a percentage of those sales aside for
advertising. This is a simple way to budget, particularly in stable
markets. However, it is somewhat backward of what you have learned thus
far in marketing: instead of advertising creating sales, it assumes
sales creates advertisements.

Some companies choose to budget their advertising dollars after all
other organizational budgeting is complete. The all-you-can-afford
approach to budgeting ensures everything else in the organization is
budgeted for and then sets aside the remaining funds for advertising.
This is a practical and simple approach, but it can often lead to
budgets that have less money than desired for much-needed advertising.

Unlike other approaches to budgeting, the return-on-investment (ROI)
approach views advertising as an investment rather than a cost. The idea
behind the return-on-investment (ROI) approach is that for every dollar
spent on advertising, a return of that dollar---plus some---is expected.
The disadvantage to this approach is the difficulty in determining
exactly which ad, media, or campaign is specifically contributing to the
return.

The competitive-parity approach relies on setting budgets based on the
expected budgets of competitors. This approach works well in stable
markets where competition is well established. However, with this
approach, marketers are setting rather important budgetary decisions
based on competition and can lose sight of internal objectives.

The final common approach to budgeting for advertising is the objective
and task approach. The objective-and-task approach is budgeting based on
the objectives set previously for the advertising plan. This approach
does not consider previous sales or expected competitor budgets.
However, marketers must be aware that this approach can lead to
overspending when other factors are not considered.

# Developing the Advertising Strategy {#sect-00010}

After marketers and other company executives set a budget for the
advertising plan, it is time to work toward the advertising strategy. In
this stage of planning, marketers will create the message and choose the
appropriate media.

## Creating the Advertising Message {#sect-00011}

Creating the advertising message can be a difficult task for marketers,
particularly in the current climate of media. The advertising message is
the visual or auditory information that is used in an advertisement to
inform or persuade the audience regarding the product, service, or
organization. Messages are usually broken down into five areas: the
headline, subheading, copy, images, and call to action. See [\#](#).
Each area must be consistent with one another and with the overall
strategy of the advertising plan and the company's values and mission.

  *Message Component*   *Purpose*                                                                           *Example*
  --------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Headline              Grabs the attention of the target audience                                          Buy One Get One Free! (BOGO)
  Subheading            Clarifies the headline or provides attention details                                Buy a couch, get a matching recliner free
  Copy                  Answers any immediate questions of the audience                                     Add a stylish yet comfortable look to your living room with our new rich brown couch and recliner in soft chenille fabric, built to last for generations
  Image(s)              Visuals to enhance the message                                                      An image of a family sitting on a new couch and recliner watching television
  Call to action        Tells the audience what they need to do now that they have seen the advertisement   Come to our showroom today to select your couch!

  : Advertising Message Components {#table-00002}

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
Advertising Messages
:::

There are numerous examples of the message components listed in [\#](#).
Check out these articles discussing ways each of these can be
successful:

Live About article: "

Buy One Get One Free (BOGO) Sales Events

"

Ecwid article: "

5 Effective "Buy One, Get One Free" Promotions for an Online Store

"

Drip article: "

Limited-Time Offers: 10 Creative Ways to Drive More Online Sales

"

HubSpot article: "

50 Call-to-Action Examples You Can't Help But Click

"
::::

## Selecting Advertising Media {#sect-00012}

Once the message is determined, the marketer will select which
advertising media is appropriate for the message. The selection of
advertising media will often be determined based on reach, frequency,
impact, and engagement that the marketer is hoping for.

Reach refers to the estimated number of potential customers that can be
reached with an advertising campaign. Frequency refers to how many times
someone is exposed to an advertisement in a given time period or how
many times an advertisement is shown in a time period.

Impact refers to how quickly members of the audience receive an
advertising message. The form of media that is used will help to
determine the impact of the message. For example, a direct mailing may
take longer to be received by the audience than a Facebook
advertisement. Finally, engagement refers to any interaction with
advertising content. This becomes particularly important in digital
marketing. The number of times members of an audience click on an
Internet ad would measure the engagement of that particular
advertisement. Clearly, the more engagement, the more likely a consumer
is to make a purchase. Keep in mind that engagement can also be
negative---such as a "dislike" or negative comment on a social media
advertisement.

There are trade-offs between reach and frequency. It seems obvious that
marketers would want an advertising campaign to reach the greatest
number of people possible with one advertisement. But is one exposure
enough to call a person to purchase the product? Often, potential
consumers need to be exposed to a message more than once before they
will make a purchase. Therefore, the marketer must decide whether
reaching the most people or reaching the same people the most is more
beneficial to the advertising strategy.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

## Different Media Alternatives {#sect-00013}

As you learned earlier in this chapter, there are different forms of
advertising media that marketers will choose from. Most marketing
strategies do not focus on only one media but rather on a mix of media
that are most likely to reach the target audience. Print media includes
magazines, newspapers, brochures, and fliers (see [\#](#)). Broadcast
media includes radio and television.

Outdoor advertising is a very economical option because it has such a
large reach. Banners, flags, wraps, events, billboards, and even
automobiles are types of outdoor advertising. Most companies have
shifted their budgets away from some of these more traditional media and
moved to digital media. Digital media is any advertising done via the
Internet, mobile phones, and other devices other than television and
radio (Kindles, iPads, etc.).

:::: {#note-00005 .note}
::: title
Car and Social Media Advertising
:::

Have you ever seen a car drive by advertising a company or service?
There are companies that will pay you to advertise on your car. [Read
more about three companies](#) that will pay you to put their
advertisement on your car.

Check out these thought leader articles on [social media marketing
trends in 2022](#) from Digital Agency Network. And learn about the
[value and impact of social listening](#) here.
::::

Each media has its own advantages and disadvantages and best uses. When
marketers decide on media to be used, they must consider the product or
service, the target market, and any budgetary constraints. For example,
a product that is primarily targeted toward senior citizens would be
best advertised through traditional media, while millennials are more
likely to see advertisements in digital form.

# Executing the Advertising Program {#sect-00014}

At this stage in the advertising plan, marketers are almost ready to
release their advertisements to the chosen media. However, before doing
so, most marketers will choose to test their advertising to a small
group of the target audience to ensure all the messaging is clear and
concise.

## Pretesting the Advertising {#sect-00015}

Pretesting advertising involves research that predicts the performance
of an advertisement before it airs. The three most common types of
pretesting are portfolio tests, jury tests, and theater tests.

Portfolio tests consist of respondents browsing through various versions
of an advertisement and then being asked to recall certain details from
each. Respondents are chosen from the target audience, and those
advertisements most recalled by participants are chosen to air for the
entire target audience.

Similarly, jury tests are a form of pretesting in which the respondents
discuss the advertisements most likely to induce a purchase.

Theater tests utilize a sample of the target audience as well. In this
form of pretesting, the audience is shown advertisements---usually
television ads---in the context that they would be shown to the entire
target market.

# Assessing and Evaluating the Advertising Program {#sect-00016}

After pretests are completed, it is time for the marketers to make any
necessary changes and disseminate the ads to the target audiences
through the chosen media. But the advertising planning does not end
there. Once advertisement messages have been out, marketers then must
assess and evaluate the programs. Even the best-planned and best-tested
programs can still be failures.

## Post-testing the Advertising {#sect-00017}

Post-testing simply refers to testing the effectiveness of a campaign
after it has launched. Marketers have several ways in which they can
post-test the advertising campaign.

Aided recall is a type of advertising posttest that uses cues to assist
a sample audience in recalling brands and products in an advertisement.

The opposite of aided recall, unaided recall does not use any cues or
prompts to test the recollection of the advertisement message. The
respondent is typically asked open-ended questions to gauge information
retained from the advertising message.

Attitude tests investigate the attitudes of a sample target audience
toward a product or service. Often, the attitude test will ask the
respondent to compare the advertised product with a competing product.

An inquiry test is a type of advertising posttest that runs two or more
similar ads on a limited scale and determines which of the ads are most
recalled by and effective for respondents.

Another form of advertising posttest is the sales test. The sales test
determines how many sales will be made based on a test market. This test
can be done as either a pretest or a posttest. As a pretest, it is used
as an estimate or prediction of future sales that the advertisement will
attract. As a posttest, it measures the actual sales that can be linked
to the advertisement.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00018}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00019}

:::: {#rf-008 .note}
::: title
:::

8\.

Rebecca Riserbato, "The Beginner's Guide to Reminder Advertising,"

The HubSpot Marketing Blog

, HubSpot, updated June 11, 2021,
https://blog.hubspot.com/marketing/reminder-advertising.
::::

:::: {#rf-009 .note}
::: title
:::

9\.

"What Is an Advertising Message: Guide," Internet Marketing 101,
SendPulse, updated August 22, 2022,
https://sendpulse.com/support/glossary/advertising-message.
::::

# 

aided recall

a type of advertising posttest that uses cues to assist a sample
audience in recalling brands and products in an advertisement

all-you-can-afford approach

advertising budget approach that ensures everything else in the
organization is budgeted for and then sets aside the remaining funds for
advertising

attitude tests

a type of advertising posttest that investigates the attitudes of a
sample target audience toward a product or service

comparative advertising

type of advertising that showcases the benefits and values of one
product as compared to its competitors

competitive-parity approach

advertising budget strategy that relies on setting budgets based on the
expected budgets of competitors

engagement

any interaction with advertising content

frequency

how many times someone is exposed to an advertisement in a given time
period or how many times an advertisement is shown in a time period

impact

how quickly members of the audience receive an advertising message

informative advertising

a type of advertising intended to raise awareness of a product through
educational communication to increase demand of the product

inquiry test

a type of advertising posttest that runs two or more similar ads on a
limited scale and determines which of the ads are most recalled by and
effective for respondents

jury tests

a form of pretesting in which the respondents discuss the advertisements
that are most likely to induce a purchase

objective-and-task approach

advertising budget strategy that is based on the objectives set
previously for the advertising plan

percentage-of-sales approach

advertising budget strategy that utilizes prior years' sales or
predicted year's sales and sets a percentage of those sales aside for
advertising

persuasive advertising

a type of advertising that aims to highlight the benefits of a product
or service being advertised

portfolio tests

a type of advertising pretest that consists of respondents browsing
through various versions of an advertisement and then being asked to
recall certain details from each

pretesting advertising

research that predicts the performance of an advertisement before it
airs

pull strategy

advertising strategy intended to bring audiences to the product

push strategy

advertising strategy aimed at pushing the brand in front of an audience

reach

the estimated number of potential customers you can reach with an
advertising campaign

reminder advertising

advertising aimed at bringing a product back into the forefront of the
consumer's mind

return-on-investment (ROI) approach

advertising budget strategy that focuses on every dollar spent on
advertising; a return of that dollar---plus some---is expected

sales test

a type of posttest in advertising that determines how many sales will be
made based on a test market

theater tests

a form of advertising pretest in which the audience is shown
advertisements---usually television ads---in the context that they would
be shown to the entire market

unaided recall

a type of advertising posttest that does not use any cues or prompts to
test the recollection of the advertisement message
