m00091

20678311-50d2-44a0-b95f-c4cafac731a7

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

List the key performance indicators (KPIs) for measuring the
effectiveness of an advertising campaign.

Describe how each KPI is measured.

# Key Metrics in Measuring Success {#sect-00002}

The most well-planned advertising campaigns are only effective if they
bring about some result. Marketers use performance metrics to determine
the effectiveness of a campaign.

Key performance indicators (KPIs) are indicators that measure how an
advertising campaign is achieving certain goals or objectives. There are
several KPIs marketers choose to measure to determine the impact of an
advertising campaign. These metrics help marketers make changes to
campaigns in order to meet the goals and objectives set forth.

## Brand Recognition {#sect-00003}

Brand recognition refers to the ability of a campaign audience to
recognize and identify a specific brand. It measures the extent to which
an audience can identify a brand with only a logo or photo. Depending on
the advertising media used, marketers will choose the most appropriate
metric to measure brand recognition. There are also numerous
brand-tracking software programs that will gather this data for
marketers.

## Brand Awareness {#sect-00004}

While brand recognition and brand awareness sound very similar, there is
a distinct difference. Brand awareness takes recognition a step further
to determine if audiences can recall information about the brand.
Awareness often seeks to determine the emotions and impressions that a
campaign has raised with specific advertisements.

## Impressions (Ad Views) {#sect-00005}

During an advertising campaign, marketers are also interested in
quantifying how many times an advertisement appears in a chosen medium,
known as impressions. To calculate impressions, you need to first
determine the rating of the advertisement. The rating is simply a
percentage of the target audience that is reached with an advertisement.
This data is often gathered by outside firms, such as Nielsen, a
long-time marketing research firm.

The following is the accepted impressions formula:

$${Impressions}~ = ~{Rating}~ \times ~{Target}~{Population}~ \times ~{Number}~{of}~{Ads}~{Run}$$

Let's assume that one of your television advertisements ran 2 times this
week. Your target audience is 1 million people. You discover that your
ad has a rating of 30 percent, or 0.30. Using the impressions formula

$${Impressions}~ = ~0.30~ \times ~1,000,000~ \times ~2~ = ~600,000~{Impressions}$$

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
Nielsen
:::

If you're going to be a marketer, you're going to need to know Nielsen
Company, a "global leader in audience measurement, data and analytics,
shaping the future of media." To better understand what the Nielsen
Company is about, [read this Investopedia article.](#)

Check out Nielsen's [2022 Global Annual Marketing Report](#) about
current trends.
::::

## Conversion Rate {#sect-00006}

A conversion rate refers to the percentage of an audience that has
completed a desired action. The formula for conversion rate is

$${Conversion}~{Rate} = \frac{\left( {{Number}~{of}~{Converts}} \right)}{({Audience}~{Size})} \times ~100\%$$

For example, a web page advertisement may be attempting to get a viewer
to click on the advertisement.

The conversion rate, then, would be the percentage of those viewers who
clicked on the advertisement. Using our example of the web page
advertisement, let's assume that our audience size 500,000 and the
number of converts (that is, the number of viewers who click the ad) is
100,000. Our conversion rate would be

$${Conversion}~{Rate} = \left( \frac{100,000}{500,000} \right)~ \times ~100\%~ = ~0.020,~\text{or}~2.0\%$$

While industry averages can vary, generally a conversion rate somewhere
between 2 percent and 5 percent for traditional marketing and above 10%
for digital marketing is considered effective.

## Return on Ad Spend (ROAS) {#sect-00007}

Marketers are also often interested in calculating the return on
advertising spending. Return on ad spend (ROAS) is a metric that
measures the amount of revenue earned for every dollar spending on
advertising. Unlike the other metrics discussed, ROAS utilizes the
revenue from advertising. To calculate ROAS, you will simply divide the
revenue for a given period by the advertising dollars in the period. The
ROAS formula is

$${ROAS} = \frac{Revenue}{\text{Advertising Dollars}}$$

Let's assume your company spent \$1,000 on an online campaign in a given
month. The revenue generated from this campaign was \$5,000. Your ROAS
for this campaign in this period would be \$5, or a 5:1 ratio:

$${ROAS} = \frac{\$ 5,000}{\$ 1,000}~ = ~\$ 5$$

In other words, for every \$1 spent on advertisement, your company
generated \$5 in revenue.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00008}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
Measuring the Impact of Advertising
:::

When marketing professionals purchase advertising, they are primarily
interested in who will see it. Advertising is dependent on views, as it
is not direct response like search or email marketing. Therefore,
marketing professionals are looking for the biggest bang for their buck.
This is where cost per thousand (CPM) comes in. The "M" in cost per
thousand represents the Latin term *mille*. CPM is the cost to advertise
to 1,000 people.

An advertisement's cost per thousand depends on a variety of factors.
One such factor is how targeted an ad is to a given audience.
Targetability increases the cost per thousand. Another factor is whether
the media is digital or traditional. Traditional media (television,
radio, print, and outdoor) have a higher CPM than digital advertising.
Niche media may have higher CPM than mass media.

There are some legitimate criticisms of CPM. First, an ad view does not
indicate an intent to purchase. It simply means that a prospective
customer saw the ad. We have no way of knowing whether the ad was
persuasive or changed behavior. CPM does not allow us to track behavior.
Next, ad views may be duplicative or not properly targeted, potentially
wasting the impression. For example, if you see an ad for the same
running shoe three times and you're not a runner, the brand wasted three
impressions on you because you have no intent to purchase. Finally, ads
may not run or load as intended, wasting advertising dollars on a failed
impression.

$${CPM} = \frac{\left( \text{Campaign Cost} \right)}{({Impressions})} \times ~1,000$$

*Let's revisit our ice cream shop from [Integrated Marketing
Communications](#). We decided to run an advertising campaign in the
local newspaper. We paid \$1,000 for 2,000 impressions. What is our
CPM?*

\$500

*Last period, we acquired 15 customers from our advertising campaign
with an average customer lifetime value of \$50. Did our advertising
campaign have a profitable result in the last period?*

No. We spent \$1,000 on advertising and gained \$750 in revenue.

*Let's say we decide to reallocate our \$1,000 advertising spend on a
more targeted campaign. Do you expect that our CPM will increase or
decrease?*

CPM will most likely increase because targeted media typically has a
higher CPM.
::::

# Endnotes {#sect-00009}

:::: {#rf-010 .note}
::: title
:::

10\.

"About Nielsen," Nielsen Overview,
https://www.nielsen.com/about-us/about/#:\~:text=Nielsen%20is%20a%20global%20leader,trusted%20intelligence%20that%20fuels%20action.
::::

:::: {#rf-011 .note}
::: title
:::

11\.

"Conversion Rate of Online Shoppers in the United States from 4th
Quarter 2020 to 4th Quarter 2021, by Device," Statista, accessed July 8,
2022,
https://www.statista.com/statistics/234884/us-online-shopper-conversion-rate-by-device/.
::::

# 

brand awareness

metric used to determine if audiences can recall information about a
brand

brand recognition

the ability of a campaign audience to recognize and identify a specific
brand

conversion rate

the percentage of an audience that has completed a desired action

impressions

quantifying how many times an advertisement appears in a medium

key performance indicators (KPIs)

indicators (metrics) that measure how an advertising campaign is
achieving certain goals or objectives

return on ad spend (ROAS)

metric that measures the amount of revenue earned for every dollar spent
on advertising
