m00092

2b68c67d-58a3-4668-b8d4-4279a37d59cd

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define public relations and discuss its role in the promotion mix.

List and describe the tools of public relations.

# Public Relations Defined {#sect-00002}

With today's ever-changing media landscape, maintaining a positive image
with the public is of utmost importance. This is where public relations
becomes an important tool in the promotion mix. Public relations is
about creating and maintaining a favorable public image. Unlike other
tools in the promotion mix, public relations is not paid for; it is
earned media. The result of public relations is called publicity.

There are two sides to public relations. The first is considered the
"fun" side, where marketers get to share stories of all the great things
an organization is doing. This helps to promote the brand's image in a
positive, feel-good way. The other side of public relations is damage
control. This is when something negative happens within an organization
and marketers must perform crisis communication---that is, addressing
issues that could negatively impact the reputation of a brand. Consider
in 2017, amid the height of Black Lives Matter protests, when PepsiCo
aired a commercial featuring Kendall Jenner calming an angry crowd by
simply handing a police officer a can of Pepsi. Activists slammed Pepsi
for trivializing such an important issue. Originally, Pepsi released a
statement supporting its advertisement, but public backlash soon changed
that position, and the company issued an apology, saying it had "missed
the mark" with its intentions.

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
Public Relations
:::

A public relations professional is someone who shares information on
behalf of a company. There are various types of public relation jobs,
and knowing the types of skills you should have to get the job is
important. Read this article to [learn about the various types of jobs
and the necessary](#) skills needed.

Read this [article from *Harvard Business Review* to gain insight](#)
into whether a job in public relations is right for you. And learn from
this [expert guide on how to get a job in public relations](#). Want to
learn about what a day looks like for a public relations professional?
Check out this video from a public relations professional about what a
day in the life of a real-world public relations professional looks
like.

[On My Way: A Day in the Life of a Public Relations Manager](#)
::::

# The Role of Public Relations in the Promotion Mix {#sect-00003}

In many organizations, public relations has been an afterthought or a
sidebar to marketing, something used only when a crisis has occurred.
However, public relations is more important than ever as the public
seeks brands that have values aligned with their own and are not
hesitant to boycott those who don't. In fact, according to a 2017
survey, 86 percent of consumers say that authenticity is a key factor
when deciding which companies and brands they will support. For example,
in the past several years, the public has become more aware and vocal
about the use of Photoshop in advertisements. In fact, many celebrities
have spoken out about their own photos being Photoshopped in media and
the unauthenticity it translates to the public. Similarly, companies
such as CVS, Dove, and Target have stopped---or limited---the use of
model editing to challenge unrealistic beauty standards.

# The Tools of Public Relations {#sect-00004}

In an age of information access and sharing, companies can no longer
afford to hide behind their mistakes, nor can they afford to miss
opportunities to boast about their good deeds. Marketers need to be
keenly aware of how the organization's image is portrayed publicly---to
all interested parties. There are several tools that marketers should
use to positively impact this image. While the goal of public relations
and publicity is to promote positive images to the public, marketers
must use public relations to minimize the impact of negative publicity
as well.

Consider CNN's *Blackfish*, which aired in 2013. The documentary shed
light on the consequences of keeping orcas in captivity, forcing them to
perform for sightseers at sea parks. It takes a deep dive into the lives
of these captive marine mammals and how sometimes such animals can be
deadly, as was witnessed at SeaWorld in 2014. The results of the
negative publicity created by the documentary caused SeaWorld's park
attendance, as well as its market value, to drop.

:::: {#note-00006 .note}
::: title
Examples of Bad Publicity
:::

Watch the *Blackfish* official trailer and see for yourself the message
behind this documentary, and [read here about the impact](#) this
negative publicity had on SeaWorld.

[Blackfish - Official Trailer](#)

You can find numerous examples of bad publicity on the Internet. [Check
out this article that identifies](#) many from companies such as Easy
Jet, Tinder, and Tesla.
::::

## Press Relations {#sect-00005}

Press relations entails establishing and maintaining positive
relationships with those in the media, such as newspapers and
television. Press relations are controlled internally by the marketing
team and often include the marketer sending press releases and other
stories that help to maintain a positive image of the brand. Although
press relations are controlled internally, it is up to the media whether
the stories will be disseminated to the public. Consider your local news
station that covers a story of a local bakery raising money for charity.
The bakery owner or marketer has most likely sent the news station a
press release of the upcoming event. The local news station will decide
if it will or will not cover the story in its newscast. The more
positive relationships the bakery team has with the local news station,
the more likely it is to receive media coverage.

## Public Affairs {#sect-00006}

Another important tool of public relations is public affairs---efforts
to influence public policy and engage with public officials and trade
associations. Public affairs often align with noncorporate entities,
such as nonprofits and government agencies. However, for-profit
organizations are becoming more and more involved in public affairs.
Organizational leaders and marketers often share their economic impact
with legislators to help policy makers amend or set new policies. For
example, when Walmart plans to open a new store, the executives often
reach out to local legislators to explain the goodwill and positive
impact on the local economy. They continue conversations with local
politicians to show they are "good citizens" of the community and help
to impact local (as well as state and federal) legislation.

## Lobbying {#sect-00007}

Very similar to public affairs, lobbying involves the intention of
influencing public policy and law. Lobbying is a way for companies to
influence legislation in their favor. Lobbying is a large part of the
political system in the United States, and many companies and industry
associations contribute massive amounts of money to influence
politicians. Lobbying has come under a lot of scrutiny over the years as
companies continue to grow and have larger resources to influence laws
and legislation in their favor as opposed to favoring the individual or
the greater society.

For example, in 2020, the National Association of Realtors was the top
lobbying association in the United States, followed by the US Chamber of
Commerce, Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America, and the
American Hospital Association. Together, these associations spent over
\$200 million lobbying to impact local, state, and federal legislation.

## Events {#sect-00008}

Organizations are increasingly sponsoring or hosting special events to
show support for various causes. Such events are also a way to showcase
the company, products/services, and/or brands to the public. Often,
companies use special events to show the public that their values and
ideals are part of their business model. For example, Kroger has
sponsored and volunteered for the Susan G. Komen Central Indiana Race
for a Cure for many years. With one of its division offices located in
Indianapolis, Indiana, the company has been covered by media for its
involvement in the local chapter of the Breast Cancer Foundation. The
events not only provide a much-needed community service but also
generate positive publicity for the company.

## Digital Media/Social Media Marketing {#sect-00009}

Social and digital media have become important tools for marketing
managers, and the use of these platforms is advantageous in public
relations as much as in advertising. The biggest advantages to using
digital tools in public relations and publicity is that they can reach a
larger audience in a short time, are fairly inexpensive in comparison to
other mediums, and allow for real-time communication.

The San Francisco Batkid took social media by storm when the campaign
was rolled out by Make-A-Wish Foundation. A boy fighting leukemia wished
to be Batman, and the campaign went viral with the hashtag #SFBatman.
People everywhere took time to volunteer and take part in the boy's
dream.

:::: {#note-00011 .note}
::: title
#SFBatman
:::

Check the #SFBatkid [Twitter hashtag here](#) to see the Batkid's
journey, watch the trailer to a movie telling his story, and watch a
video showcasing the public relations campaign.

[Batkid Begins - Official Trailer \[HD\]](#)

[Official Batkid Video](#)
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00010}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00011}

:::: {#rf-012 .note}
::: title
:::

12\.

Business Insider, "People Are Outraged by This Pepsi Ad Starring Kendall
Jenner," April 5, 2017, YouTube video, 01:32,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=\_4CCkUVXHBQ.
::::

:::: {#rf-013 .note}
::: title
:::

13\.

"Stackla Survey Finds Authenticity Drives Brand Affinity and
Consumer-Created Content Influences Purchases,"

Nosto Newsroom

(blog), Nosto, November 9, 2017,
https://stackla.com/resources/reports/the-consumer-content-report-influence-in-the-digital-age/.
::::

:::: {#rf-014 .note}
::: title
:::

14\.

Wikipedia, s.v. "Tilikum (orca)," last modified July 20, 23:09,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tilikum\_(orca).
::::

:::: {#rf-015 .note}
::: title
:::

15\.

"7 Companies Hurt by Bad Publicity," MarketWatch, August 18, 2014,
https://www.marketwatch.com/story/7-companies-hurt-by-bad-publicity-2014-08-18.
::::

:::: {#rf-016 .note}
::: title
:::

16\.

"Three Examples of Successful Public Affairs Strategy," Quorum, last
modified August 2, 2022,
https://www.quorum.us/blog/examples-successful-public-affairs-strategy/.
::::

:::: {#rf-017 .note}
::: title
:::

17\.

Jake Frankenfield, "Which Industry Spends the Most on Lobbying?,"
Investopedia, Dotdash Meredith, updated June 02, 2022,
https://www.investopedia.com/investing/which-industry-spends-most-lobbying-antm-so/.
::::

:::: {#rf-018 .note}
::: title
:::

18\.

"Top Lobbying Spenders in the United States in 2020," Statista, accessed
June 17, 2022,
https://www.statista.com/statistics/257344/top-lobbying-spenders-in-the-us/.
::::

:::: {#rf-019 .note}
::: title
:::

19\.

"Susan G. Komen Names Kroger Central Division Outstanding Volunteer
Group of the Year," Susan G. Komen Central Indiana, Susan G. Komen, July
28, 2016,
https://komencentralindiana.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/2016-Kroger-national-award-PR-final.pdf.
::::

# 

lobbying

networking and other efforts that have the intention of influencing
public policy and law

press relations

efforts to establish and maintain positive relationships with those in
the media by sending press releases and other stories that help to
maintain a positive image of the brand

public affairs

efforts to influence public policy and engage with public officials and
trade associations

publicity

notice or attention given by the media

public relations

any actions that help to create and maintain a favorable public image
