m00093

4c00228c-e6c5-4295-853c-e4db855daf95

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Discuss the advantages of public relations.

Discuss the disadvantages of public relations.

# Advantages of Public Relations {#sect-00002}

From a business perspective, the greatest advantage to public relations
is that of cost; public relations is not a paid form of promotion.
However, there are other advantages that accompany a well-thought-out
public relations strategy.

## Increasing Brand Credibility {#sect-00003}

Because public relations are unpaid and come from an objective
source---news media---they are perceived as much more credible than paid
forms of advertising. In fact, it is the most credible and persuasive
form of promotion. Most consumers value the opinions of news media and
opinion leaders over that of a company's best advertising.

## Increasing Sales and Leads {#sect-00004}

Another advantage of public relations is that of sales and leads. Again,
because public relations is considered a more credible source of
information, various tools in public relations can help to increase
sales and leads for the organization. Imagine you are attending an event
that is raising money for the local animal shelter because you are a
huge animal advocate. You see signs that an organization unfamiliar to
you is the lead sponsor. While you may never have heard of this
organization, let alone considered buying from this company in the past,
the fact that it is helping raising money for the local animal shelter
sways your decision to do business with them. For example, let's look at
Campfire Treats, which makes dog treats. This company was one of the
first in its industry to embrace the Better Chicken Commitment (BCC) to
ensure better treatment of chickens. The company has gained industry
publicity and is becoming popular with pet owners that embrace more
humane animal treatment.

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
Pet Food Industry.com
:::

Check out this [Pet Food Industry.com article](#) to learn more about
Campfire Treats and its commitment to BCC. If you're interested in
learning more about the product, check out this video review from Top
Dog Tips or this [article from Groovy Goldendoodles](#).

[Campfire Natural Dog Treats Review, Single-ingredient (2018)](#)
::::

## Positive Brand Image {#sect-00005}

Because consumers are more likely to patronize organizations whose
values align with their own, public relations has the distinct
opportunity to provide a positive brand image to audiences. When
organizations are authentic in their own values, it translates to
increased loyalty and brand equity.

## Cost-Effectiveness {#sect-00006}

As you've already learned, public relations is not a paid tool in the
promotion mix. A really good brand or company story can be picked up by
several media outlets, exposing the promotion to a large audience.
Considered the Ice Bucket Challenge that went viral in 2015. The
challenge was first promoted by Pat Quinn and Pete Frates as a way for
the public to better understand how Lou Gehrig's disease (amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis \[ALS\]) affects those with the disease. The challenge
raised over \$115 million worldwide for the disease and was an extremely
cost-effective (and fun) way to raise funds when it went viral on social
media.

# Disadvantages of Public Relations {#sect-00007}

While public relations is a cost-effective way to potentially reach a
large audience, it does come with its own set of challenges, including
no direct control, lack of guaranteed results, and a difficulty in
evaluating effectiveness.

## No Direct Control {#sect-00008}

Unlike other tools in the promotion mix, marketers have no direct
control over public relations. In other words, the media controls how
the organization is portrayed, when---or if---the coverage will appear,
and where it will be placed. This is why press relations is such an
integral part of the public relations strategy.

## Lack of Guaranteed Results {#sect-00009}

Proficient marketers will spend time crafting the perfect press release,
curating photographs, and getting just the right message to the media.
They can even have excellent relationships with media personnel, but it
is ultimately the decision of the media if it will publish a story. A
story that is buried deep in a newspaper's pages or a blur during a news
program may not create the results marketers intended.

## Difficulty of Evaluating Effectiveness {#sect-00010}

Public relation activities can be difficult to measure. A marketer can
observe media mentions and stories, but the impact they have on the
audience can be difficult to determine. Other tools in the promotion mix
can be targeted to the audience of interest, but public relations is
not. As such, marketers should consider paying keen attention to areas
such as website traffic and social media mentions or shares to determine
who is seeing the press and what they are saying about it.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00011}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00012}

:::: {#rf-020 .note}
::: title
:::

20\.

Alyssa Hardt, "Campfire Treats Embraces the Better Chicken Commitment,"
Petfood Industry, WATT Global Media, December 1, 2021,
https://www.petfoodindustry.com/articles/10847-campfire-treats-adopts-the-better-chicken-commitment.
::::

:::: {#rf-021 .note}
::: title
:::

21\.

"Campfire Treats Adopts the Better Chicken Commitment to Raise the Bar
for Farm Animal Welfare," Pets+, November 19, 2021,
https://petsplusmag.com/campfire-treats-adopts-the-better-chicken-commitment-to-raise-the-bar-for-farm-animal-welfare/.
::::

:::: {#rf-022 .note}
::: title
:::

22\.

"Understanding the Impact of the Ice Bucket Challenge on the ALS
Association's Finances," The ALS Association, June 5, 2019,
https://www.als.org/blog/understanding-impact-ice-bucket-challenge-als-associations-finances.
::::

:::: {#rf-023 .note}
::: title
:::

23\.

"Pros and Cons of Public Relations," The Lonely Entrepreneur, October
30, 2017,
https://lonelyentrepreneur.com/entrepreneur-public-relations-2/.
::::
