m00094

850b3418-5f8f-454c-88f5-21854e953dfe

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Illustrate ethical issues with respect to advertising.

Illustrate ethical issues with respect to public relations.

# Ethical Issues Related to Advertising {#sect-00002}

Marketers must be keenly aware of not only the legal implications of
advertising, but also the ethical ramifications. The Federal Trade
Commission (FTC) has a number of laws that help to protect consumers
against false claims in advertisements. The watchdog group Truth in
Advertising is an independent, nonprofit organization that "empower\[s\]
consumers to protect themselves and one another against false
advertising and deceptive marketing."

## Truth in Advertising {#sect-00003}

Every year, Americans spend billions of dollars on health-related
products, such as supplements, exercise programs, and nonprescription
medication. Unfortunately, many of the advertisements claim that
these---and many other---products will perform in a way that has not
been proven. Not only can such claims be very harmful to individuals,
but they can also get companies in big trouble.

In 2021, Subway was put in the spotlight by its own franchisees for its
"Eat Fresh" slogan. The franchisees claimed that the slogan was
misleading and that Subway's ingredients were often days or weeks old
when they arrived at the stores and that the meat was laden with
chemicals.

## Advertising to Children {#sect-00004}

Marketers must be keenly aware of how they advertise to children.
Children are exposed to advertising just as often as adults. It is
estimated that children view more than 40,000 commercials per year.
However, children and youth do not understand how to decipher those
advertisements that are trying to get them to want something. For
products that are harmful to, not meant for, or illegal to sell to
children, marketers need to steer clear of advertising to children.

The vape company Juul found itself in hot water in 2019 when it was
accused of marketing to teens. The company advertised its
product---intended for adults only---on websites such as Nickelodeon,
the Cartoon Network, and Seventeen, all sites directed toward youth.

## Advertising Harmful Products {#sect-00005}

When organizations run advertisements for potentially harmful products,
they can be held legally liable for the claims and for any harm caused
by the product. Even if the company is not held legally liable, the
reputation of the business can be damaged.

Have you ever noticed in a prescription drug commercial, there is
considerable time spent on the side effects of the medication? Or that
at the bottom of the screen there is a disclosure that the actor is not
an actual patient? These are all required by the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act (FFDCA), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and the
FTC to adhere to truth in advertising expectations.

# Ethical Issues Related to Public Relations {#sect-00006}

Similar to being truthful in advertising, marketers must also be aware
of how they are disseminating information via public relations. Again,
with the increase in social media and the Internet in general, it is
much easier for consumers to find information regarding companies. In
addition, it is much more commonplace for consumers to call out
companies that are being unethical or dishonest. It is much easier for
organizations to be honest and transparent up front than try to dig
themselves out of a public relations nightmare.

:::: {#note-00006 .note}
::: title
IKEA
:::

The start of the COVID-19 pandemic required the entire world to shift
its perspective. This was true for marketers as well. Many companies
changed their marketing strategies from selling goods and services to
creating feelings of goodwill and solidarity. IKEA, the Swedish
furniture manufacturer, was no exception. In a marketing campaign
launched early in the pandemic, the company offered six ways to build a
furniture fort, giving the public ways to cope with being quarantined.
The campaign earned a nod in *AdWeek*'s most notable advertisements.
[Read more about the campaign, and see the forts, here.](#)
::::

## Transparency {#sect-00007}

An important part of managing public relations is to disseminate
information to the public. It can be a very effective way of gaining
loyalty and interest in the brand. The more transparent a company is to
its target market, the more trust consumers have in the brand.

Whole Foods, known for offering natural foods, faced scrutiny over its
mislabeling of genetically engineered foods. The company's top priority
became that of transparency, and it requires every product sold as
non-GMO to go through a verification process.

## Selective Truth Telling {#sect-00008}

Selective truth telling is a practice in which a person or organization
tells a portion of the truth but omits other portions of the truth.
Particularly in the face of scrutiny, marketers have always had to
decide how much of the truth should be provided in order to satisfy the
public but also protect the organization. In more recent years, many
organizations have been increasingly telling the whole truth upfront, to
avoid being called out later.

## Verifying Facts and Information {#sect-00009}

Fact-checking in a process to verify facts on an issue. Marketers must
do their best to present information that is valid to their target. This
should be done before the information gets released to the public. In a
society of "fake news," consumers are more skeptical than ever when it
comes to information. Obviously, presenting information that is not
factual will lead to decreased trust from the public.

:::: {#note-00009 .note}
::: title
TOMS
:::

In 2006, Blake Mycoskie founded TOMS shoes (see [\#](#)), the name of
which comes from the word "tomorrow." TOMS is committed to its One for
One model: for every item purchased, an item is donated to those in
need. Since its inception, TOMS has also committed one-third of its
profits to grassroots movements.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

TOMS remains transparent, and the company's behavior is aligned with its
values. In every advertising campaign launched, TOMS' philanthropic
mission is consistently reinforced to the public. As a result, it's
nearly impossible for anyone to think of TOMS as anything but aligned
completely with its mission, whether one is visiting the company's
website, viewing print media, or looking at the company's social media.
::::

#  {#sect-00010}

In this chapter, we discuss the importance of advertising and public
relations in the promotional mix. Major decisions that need to be made
in order to successfully build a strong advertising campaign include
establishing objectives, creating an advertising budget, developing a
strategy, executing the campaign, assessing and evaluating the program,
and post-testing the advertising. The use of metrics to measure the
success provide key information to marketers and include brand
recognition and/or awareness, ad views, conversion rates, and return on
ad spend.

The advantages and disadvantages of public relations as it impacts the
promotion mix were discussed, along with related ethical issues. The
tools used to carry out public relations and publicity were explained.

#  {#sect-00011}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00012}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00013}

The act of building a personal brand requires a commitment that comes
with having a well-developed and clear path. One of the many tools that
a person can use to set and review their progress is [the GOOD framework
from Quantum Workplace](#). This framework can be used to set goals,
identify obstacles and opportunities, and make decisions. As with any
strategic goal-setting framework, the important thing to remember is
that it should be used organically, allowing for the shifts that come
with growth and development.

The framework includes the following parts:

Goals: What goals are you setting? What needs to be done to achieve
them?

Obstacles: What is standing in your way? Can you work around or remove
the obstacles?

Opportunities: What can you pursue for learning and development to move
you forward?

Decisions: What decisions do you have to make to reach your goals? What
will you do more of? What will you do less of?

This framework can be utilized on a personal and professional basis. The
idea is to monitor and review throughout the year to determine whether
you are on track, have the need to reassess, have achieved your goals,
or need to create new ones.

#  {#sect-00014}

Send a message to your college or university marketing department asking
for a time to talk to the marketing manager about their job for your
class. These positions vary greatly based on how many functions they
outsource. Use the following questions as a guide to dig deeper into
their process and responsibilities.

Please share with me your employment history and how you got to where
you are today.

Can you summarize your job responsibilities?

Is the organizational structure of the company you work for private,
nonprofit, or state?

Can you share with me what functions, if any, are outsourced (for
example, website design, website maintenance, graphic design, or
printing of materials)? How long have you been outsourcing these
functions?

How many employees report to you, and what is person's role?

What challenges do you face with the structure you currently have in
place?

Feel free to add any questions you might have. Thank them for their
time. From this interview you should be able to gain more insight into
how different areas of marketing are handled within a given
organization's marketing department.

#  {#sect-00015}

## Peloton {#sect-00016}

If you have ever taken a class at your local gym, you know the
excitement of the camaraderie and competition that takes place when you
are in a class of like-minded individuals all sharing the same goal and
passion for performance. Former Barnes & Noble e-commerce executive John
Foley liked riding his stationary bike but wanted to bring the gym class
experience to his at-home riding sessions. And in 2012, the idea for
Peloton was born.

Hailed as "Netflix for Fitness," Peloton introduced its first bike in
2013. The company had slow and steady growth. With several rounds of
funding, the start-up took off and began to take hold among consumers
who enjoyed the rigorous workouts provided by trainers through the
built-in bike video screens and subscription service to the various
"rides."

For Christmas 2019, Peloton debuted what turned out to be a significant
ad for the young brand. Featuring a husband buying a Peloton for his
wife, the ad took viewers through the mind and thoughts of the wife
while she rode her bike and seemingly got more "in shape." Viewer
outrage kicked up as some viewers believed the ad depicted a husband
body-shaming his wife with the gift of exercise for the holidays. Check
out the Peloton Christmas Commercial from 2019.

[Peloton bike Christmas advert \| The Gift That Gives Back](#)

While the ad may have sparked some controversy, it did one thing
successfully---it got people talking about Peloton. The ads allowed the
viewer to glimpse the life of a Peloton user---it showed the fun method
of the video courses, the use of the bike no matter what the weather
outside, and the potential transformation of the Peloton user.

The other element of the ad's storyline is that it sparked a parody ad
produced by Maximum Effort, a film production and digital marketing
agency. The agency was founded by the actor Ryan Reynolds, and the
parody ad featured a voice-over by Reynolds himself. Although the ad was
for Aviation Gin, a brand owned by Reynolds, the ad featured the "wife"
from the Peloton Christmas ad. The parody ad did three things---kept
people talking about Peloton, created a memorable story for Aviation
Gin, and connected Reynolds and the Peloton brand.

[AdWatch: Aviation Gin / The Gift That Doesn\'t Give Back](#)

As Peloton began to take off in the United States, the country literally
came to a screeching halt. In January 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic hit
the country. Within months, citizens everywhere were quarantined, with
gyms, restaurants, travel, businesses---everything---shut down. What
started as 14 days to slow the spread turned into months. Remote work
and learning became the norm, and people started to feel restless cooped
up in their homes.

As the pandemic surged, so did Peloton. It picked up the fitness
gauntlet, and in 2020, for the first quarter ever, the company turned a
profit with a 172 percent increase in sales, stock up 220 percent, and
over 1 million subscriptions. The new challenge for the organization was
in the fulfillment of orders.

During the pandemic of 2019--2021, Peloton became a household name. It
was the topic of discussion on the Fox News show *The Five*. Hosts Greg
Gutfeld and Dana Perino regularly discussed the joy they got from using
their Peloton bikes. Consumers everywhere were "riding out" the pandemic
on a Peloton.

Even as sales surged and Peloton became a household name, it was being
woven into the fabric of the American culture, such as on the '90s hit
show *Sex and the City*. With the aging of the show's stars, the
demographic of viewers was prime for a reboot. And so, in late 2021, the
show's stars reprised their famous roles and *And Just Like That*
debuted.

The show premiered on HBO to a record audience.

Per HBO Max, the *Sex and the City* revival starring Sarah Jessica
Parker, Cynthia Nixon and Kristin Davis had a strong 24-hour performance
that ranks as the most viewed series premiere of a new HBO or HBO Max
series on the streaming service. Overall, the *AJLT* opener ranks in the
Top 10 of all HBO Max's movies and series debuts, including both HBO and
Max originals, trailing just some of the tentpole Warner Bros. movies
that launched on the platform.

However, the huge debut marked a significant moment for Peloton. In the
first episode, one of the major stars of the show, Mr. Big, dropped dead
of a heart attack after a spin on his Peloton. Throughout the episode,
the love affair Mr. Big has with his bike and his appreciation for the
instructor provide the major plotline to the show. This led to the
question, How would the character's death affect Peloton?

Product placement has always been a significant public relations
initiative of consumer product companies. The *James Bond* franchise
traditionally partners with well-known brands for placement in the
movies and use by the popular cultural icon. The use of real products
helps connect the consumer to the movie. It is usually a boon to the
brand, and the movie benefits from the more realistic quality the
product adds to the movie.

In the case of Peloton and Mr. Big, Peloton did not pay for the
placement, but they did agree to the brand's use in the show. According
to a spokesperson for the company, the plotline was a complete surprise.
So how does the show recover from "death by Peloton"?

Enter a new parody advertisement developed by Ryan Reynolds and Maximum
Effort. When Reynolds created the ad for Aviation Gin that poked a
little fun at Peloton and its "body-shaming" commercial, the actor
became connected with the marketing arm of Peloton. It was time for a
new parody. In this go-around, the focus would be on Peloton and Mr.
Big. Actor Chris Noth, who played Mr. Big in the television show *Sex
and the City* and the reboot *And Just Like That*, agreed to appear in
the ad. Less than 48 hours after the show debut and the death of Mr.
Big, Noth made an appearance in a Peloton ad, which shows him very much
still alive. The big win all around is for Peloton and its significant
increase in brand awareness.

The response from Peloton to the death of the main character Mr. Big on
*And Just Like That* was to create an advertisement showing him very
much alive---a clever approach and certainly an effort that gained
Peloton brand recognition. Watch his death on the television show, and
watch the commercial response here.

[And Just Like That/Sex And The City - Big Dies](#)

[YouTube Video](#)

## Case Questions {#sect-00017}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00018}

:::: {#rf-024 .note}
::: title
:::

24\.

"About," Truth in Advertising, last modified February 28, 2022,
https://truthinadvertising.org/about/.
::::

:::: {#rf-025 .note}
::: title
:::

25\.

Mura Dominko, "Subway's 'Eat Fresh' Slogan Is Alarmingly Misleading,
Operators Say," Eat This, Not That!, Galvanized Media, April 27, 2021,
https://www.eatthis.com/news-subway-eat-fresh-slogan-alarmingly-misleading/.
::::

:::: {#rf-026 .note}
::: title
:::

26\.

Brian L. Wilcox et al.,

Report of the APA Task Force on Advertising and Children

(American Psychological Association, February 20, 2004),
https://www.apa.org/pubs/reports/advertising-children.
::::

:::: {#rf-027 .note}
::: title
:::

27\.

Julia Belluz, "The Vape Company Juul Said It Doesn't Target Teens. Its
Early Ads Tell a Different Story," Vox, January 25, 2019,
https://www.vox.com/2019/1/25/18194953/vape-juul-e-cigarette-marketing.
::::

:::: {#rf-028 .note}
::: title
:::

28\.

Scott Thompson, "The Advertisement of Harmful Products," Small Business,
Chron.com, last modified October 26, 2016,
https://smallbusiness.chron.com/advertisement-harmful-products-65363.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-029 .note}
::: title
:::

29\.

Sara Spary, "Ikea's Quarantine Campaign Offers 6 Ways to Make Furniture
Forts,"

Adweek

, May 13, 2020,
https://www.adweek.com/brand-marketing/ikeas-quarantine-campaign-offers-6-ways-to-make-furniture-forts/.
::::

:::: {#rf-030 .note}
::: title
:::

30\.

Jonha Richman, "5 Examples of Companies Succeeding through
Transparency,"

Entrepreneur

, May 27, 2016, https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/274636.
::::

:::: {#rf-031 .note}
::: title
:::

31\.

Blake Mycoskie, "Trendsetter: TOMS Founder Blake Mycoskie on Starting a
Movement," interview by Katie Morell, October 5, 2011,
https://www.americanexpress.com/en-us/business/trends-and-insights/articles/trendsetter-toms-founder-blake-mycoskie-on-starting-a-movement/.
::::

:::: {#rf-032 .note}
::: title
:::

32\.

"Wear Good," TOMS, accessed July 8, 2022,
https://www.toms.com/us/impact.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-033 .note}
::: title
:::

33\.

Dan Shewan, "Ethical Marketing: 5 Examples of Companies with a
Conscience,"

The WordStream Blog

, WordStream, updated May 20, 2022,
https://www.wordstream.com/blog/ws/2017/09/20/ethical-marketing.
::::

:::: {#rf-034 .note}
::: title
:::

34\.

Jordan Valinsky, "Peloton Sales Surge 172% as Pandemic Bolsters Home
Fitness Industry," CNN Business, Cable News Network, September 11, 2020,
https://www.cnn.com/2020/09/11/business/peloton-stock-earnings/index.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-035 .note}
::: title
:::

35\.

Valinsky, "Peloton Sales Surge."
::::

:::: {#rf-036 .note}
::: title
:::

36\.

David Griner, "Ryan Reynolds on How His Peloton Ad Collaboration Came
Together in 48 Hours,"

Adweek

, December 13, 2021,
https://www.adweek.com/convergent-tv/ryan-reynolds-on-how-his-peloton-ad-collaboration-came-together-in-48-hours/.
::::

:::: {#rf-037 .note}
::: title
:::

37\.

David Griner, "How Ryan Reynolds Pulled Off Aviation Gin's Peloton
Parody, Capping His Year of Genius Ads,"

Adweek

, December 13, 2019,
https://www.adweek.com/creativity/how-ryan-reynolds-pulled-off-aviation-gins-peloton-parody-capping-his-year-of-genius-ads/.
::::

:::: {#rf-038 .note}
::: title
:::

38\.

Joseph Pisani and Megan Graham, "Peloton: Don't Blame Us for What
Happened in 'And Just Like That . . .' (Spoilers Ahead),"

Wall Street Journal

, December 10, 2021,
https://www.wsj.com/articles/peloton-dont-blame-us-for-what-happened-in-and-just-like-that-spoilers-ahead-11639097331.
::::

:::: {#rf-039 .note}
::: title
:::

39\.

Alexandra Del Rosario and Nellie Andreeva, "'And Just Like That . . .'
Delivers HBO Max's Strongest Series Debut; 'The Sex Lives of College
Girls' Peaks in Viewers with Finale,"

Deadline

, December 10, 2021,
https://deadline.com/2021/12/and-just-like-that-hbo-max-strongest-series-debut-the-sex-lives-of-college-girls-peaks-viewers-finale-1234889116/.
::::
