m00075

d9c47088-62d9-473f-8eb0-0ab797d7944a

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

In February 2005, Amazon launched Amazon Prime, which offered unlimited
two-day delivery for millions of items. At a time when consumers were
accustomed to paying high shipping fees and experiencing slow service,
the membership service---\$79 per year---offered a new alternative. It
was a first-of-its-kind pricing structure that has sparked many
companies to do the same. Today's subscription services cover everything
from toilet paper to dog toys. Amazon Prime is still arguably the most
prevalent subscription service in history. In 2021, Amazon reported its
Amazon Prime members had reached 200 million worldwide.

The membership, according to a public letter from Jeff Bezos, executive
chair of the Amazon board, "takes the effort out of ordering; no minimum
purchase and no consolidating orders. Two-day shipping becomes an
everyday experience rather than an occasional indulgence."

Since its first offering in 2005, Amazon has raised its prices only
three times---in 2014 to \$99 a year, in 2018 to \$119, and most
recently to \$139/year. While rumbles in the market suggested that these
price increases might drive away customers, Amazon has proven this was
not the case. The price increases through the years also included new
benefits---Amazon Prime video, Prime Pantry, Prime Reading, and many
others. The company demonstrates that consumers are, in fact, willing to
pay higher prices---so long as they can perceive value that is added to
the increase in price.

# Endnotes {#sect-00001}

:::: {#rf-001 .note}
::: title
:::

1\.

George Hatch, "What You Need to Know about Amazon Prime: 2005--Today,"

Pattern Blog

, Pattern, August 20, 2020,
https://pattern.com/blog/amazon-prime-a-timeline-from-2005-to-2020/.
::::

:::: {#rf-002 .note}
::: title
:::

2\.

Parkev Tatevosian, "Amazon Reaches 200 Million Prime Members: Here's Why
That's a Big Deal," The Motley Fool, April 27, 2021,
https://www.fool.com/investing/2021/04/27/amazon-reaches-200-million-prime-member-milestone/.
::::

:::: {#rf-003 .note}
::: title
:::

3\.

Hatch, "What You Need."
::::

:::: {#rf-004 .note}
::: title
:::

4\.

Anisha Sekar and Tommy Tindall, "What Is Amazon Prime? The Benefits, the
Cost and Whether It's Worth It," NerdWallet, June 28, 2022,
https://www.nerdwallet.com/article/finance/amazon-prime-benefits-cost-worth.
::::
