m00076

d0d6f212-bbd2-4405-b784-aaf40e6c7456

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define pricing.

Explain pricing and its role in the marketing mix.

Explain the psychology of pricing.

# Pricing Defined {#sect-00002}

Anytime anything is sold, a price is involved. Recall that during the
exchange process, a seller is offering something of value to a buyer in
exchange for also something of value. This value to the seller is often
referred to as price. The practice of pricing is not a new concept. Some
of the oldest records of prices ever discovered were found on clay
tablets with symbols in Uruk, located in modern-day Iraq. The records
are written receipts of exchanges of sheep, beer, and barley and date
back to 3300 BCE!

You may recall that price is one of the 4Ps of marketing, or one element
in the marketing mix. Once a product has been developed, marketers must
determine at which price the product or service will be offered to the
target market. Today, pricing is one of the more difficult decisions
that marketers must make in the marketing mix because it directly
impacts the perception of value from the customer as well as the
company's bottom line. Poor decisions in pricing can have immediate and
catastrophic effects on profits that are difficult for companies to
recover from. Price decisions must be linked to a product or service's
real and perceived value while also considering competition, supply
costs, and when discounts should be offered.

Simply put, price refers to the exchange of something of value between a
buyer and a seller. The price determines how much revenue the company
will earn and drives the financial health of the organization. However,
marketers cannot simply price products and services based on the
expected revenue of the organization. The price must be set so that the
buyer sees value in the product offering and the price they will pay for
it. In other words, marketers must put the perception of value in the
product's price at the forefront while also considering the financial
impact to the organization.

While price is what is referred to when discussing most goods and
services, price can take on many terms depending on the exchange that is
taking place. In higher education, you are paying tuition---the
price---in exchange for your education. If you need an attorney, you are
likely going to pay a fee---the price---for services rendered. When you
are traveling and have to pay a toll, it is the price you pay for using
the road or bridge. Regardless of the exact terminology used, pricing of
goods and services have the same basic elements.

# Elements of Pricing {#sect-00003}

While a marketer is determining the price of goods and services, they
must keep in mind that pricing must benefit both parties involved in the
exchange process: the seller (company) and the buyer (customer). Both
parties must see value in the product process through pricing for the
exchange process to be successful. We'll first discuss how price is an
indicator of value to the buyer and then turn our attention to the
seller.

## Price as an Indicator of Value {#sect-00004}

When a buyer purchases a product or service, they seek to satisfy a need
through the purchase. The customer will, consciously or not, use several
criteria to determine the amount they are willing to spend to satisfy
that need. These criteria ultimately lead to the value that the customer
sees in the product.

The price-value equation is a subjective assessment by a consumer about
what they deem as a value. The price-value equation states that as a
customer's expectations are met at what they consider an acceptable
price, value is realized. Value is related to the quality and price of
the product, and the formula is

$${Value} = \frac{Quality}{Price}$$

For example, if a consumer purchases a high-end designer Chanel handbag
for \$11,000, they might equate the value to a beautiful, high-end,
well-made handbag that will last for many years. They may also
subconsciously believe the bag will portray a certain social status
while carrying it. For them, there is value and quality in the product,
and they are willing to pay the high price.

Consider another example: you are in the middle of fixing dinner, and
you realize you don't have enough milk for the dish you are preparing.
There is a convenience store just a block away from your house and a
grocery store five miles away. If you send your partner to walk to the
closer convenience store, they will pay more for the milk than if they
were to drive the extra five miles to the grocery store, which would be
less expensive. With the higher-priced item at the convenience store,
you are paying for the convenience. The value in this scenario is in the
time saved even at a higher price.

With these two examples, the perceived benefits are directly related the
price-value equation. Perceived benefits can include status,
convenience, brand, quality, etc. and can vary from buyer to buyer or
even situation to situation.

Perceived costs can also include a host of criteria in addition to the
price printed on the price tag. Let's return to the milk purchase
example. If the situation were different---say you were not in the
middle of cooking dinner---would your decision change? Perhaps. You will
still consider other factors before making the decision. How long does
it take for you to drive that extra five miles? Is the grocery store
known for having long lines during the time you will be shopping? Do you
need other items you can only get at that store? Does the store carry
the brand of milk you prefer? These are only a few of the many
considerations you make before you decide to make the purchase. These
are all perceived costs and are weighed against the perceived benefits
the buyer considers when determining value.

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
Upside
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Founded in 2016, Upside is an app that promotes itself as saving
customers money on purchases at gas stations as well as helping local
brick-and-mortar businesses earn more profit. Here's how it works:
Upside links to gas stations, restaurants, and grocery stores within a
specified mile-radius of the user. The user chooses to claim an offer on
the app and has four hours to upload the receipt. The linked businesses
are those that have contracted with Upside to drive business to their
establishment. Once redeemed, cash is deposited into the user's account
and can be cashed out for gift cards or to a PayPal account.

Upside is banking on the value equation as well as psychological factors
of pricing to attract both buyers and sellers. Gas prices, for example,
are relatively unchanged from station to station in a small geographical
area. If the user is able to get 25 cents cash back per gallon on their
fill-up, they may swap convenience of the closer station with that of
getting a cash reward at a station a few miles away. If the buyer
chooses the station with cash back over one without, the seller (gas
station) also finds value in a one-time or new customer.

For more information about Upside, visit [the app's website](#).
::::

## Price in the Marketing Mix {#sect-00005}

Recall that the marketing mix elements include product, price,
promotion, and place. Marketers create value through the maximization of
benefits within an acceptable price point using the marketing mix
elements. Price, however, is the only element of the marketing mix that
directly produces revenue for the company. The other elements are
considered costs to organization. Another way to think of price as
differing from the other elements is to understand the price not only
creates perceived value for the customer but also harvests monetary
value for the company. Because price is the revenue-generating element
of the marketing mix, it is vital that marketers set the right price
both to match buyer perceptions and to maximize company profits. Profit
is determined by subtracting total expenses from total revenue.

## The Profit Equation {#sect-00006}

Recall that the goal of any for-profit company is make a profit. The
price marketers set for goods and services offered will have a direct
impact on the company's profit-making ability. Therefore, it is
imperative that the price set is one that achieves value not only for
the buyer but also for the company. Certainly, buyers would prefer a
lower price---or even free---for goods and services. It's simply not
feasible for a company to give its products and services away for free;
the company would cease to exist very quickly, which does not serve
either the company or the buyer well. Rather, it is in the company's
interest to set prices that create value for the buyer and profit
maximization for the company, as this gives the organization the best
chance of continuing to create value in the long term.

So what is the best price that creates value for the seller? In short,
it's the one that creates value for the buyer and simultaneously
generating the maximum profit. If a price is set too high, the buyer may
refuse to purchase because they do not see the value; in turn, the
company loses out on profit. Alternatively, if the price is set too low,
the company may be losing out on profits when a buyer would be willing
to pay a higher price.

Profit is the financial gain of a company, or the difference between the
amount earned and the amount spent in buying, operating, or producing
something. It is the difference between total revenue and total costs
and is calculated with the profit equation.

$${Profit}~ = ~{Total}~{Revenue}~–~{Total}~{Costs}~~$$

Let's look at this formula more closely.

Total revenue

is the money generated from normal business operations. It is calculated
by the sales price of a product times the quantity of units sold. For
example, a company selling wireless earbuds for \$19.99 that sold 5,000
units in one period has revenues of \$99,950.

Total costs

of a company are the costs of sales and operating expenses. It is all
expenses related to operating the business that are directly related to
producing a good or service and that are indirectly related to producing
goods and services. In other words, it includes items such as building
leases, employee salaries, and electricity as well as direct costs in
producing the product, such as component parts and equipment.

Total costs can be categorized as either fixed or variable. Fixed costs
are those expenses that do not change regardless of the number of units
sold. For example, if the company selling wireless earbuds makes one
unit or one million units, the company still has to pay the mortgage for
the building it is occupying; the mortgage payment does not increase or
decrease based on the number of units produced. Alternatively, variable
costs do change based on the number of units produced. In the wireless
earbud example, the company would spend more per unit if it ordered
fewer units. If it ordered a higher quantity of units, the unit price
would decrease.

In determining profit, the total costs include both the fixed and
variable costs. The formula is

$${Total}~{Costs}~ = ~{Fixed}~{Costs}~ + ~{Variable}~{Costs}~$$

When setting prices, the marketer must determine how much profit can be
made from the sale of goods and services. However, as mentioned earlier,
profit is not the only deciding factor in price. Much research has been
done on how psychology also effects the perception of pricing.

# The Psychology of Pricing {#sect-00007}

From a marketer's standpoint, these are all factors that must be
considered when setting price. In addition to the value perceived by the
buyer, the marketer must also understand other psychological factors
that influence the buyer's perception of price. Several psychological
pricing examples are discussed next.

## Price Anchoring {#sect-00008}

When Steve Jobs introduced the Apple iPad during a Keynote in 2010, he
showed off the high-resolution screen and talked about its revolutionary
features. "What should we price it at?" he asked. "If you listen to the
pundits, we're going to price it at under \$1,000, which is code for
\$999." He put a giant \$999 on the screen. He finally went on: "I am
thrilled to announce to you that iPad pricing starts not at \$999, but
at just \$499." The screen then showed the \$999 price being crushed
with the \$499 price. The crowd went wild!

The concept of price anchoring relies on the first piece of information
that a buyer sees. This acts as an anchor, or a frame of reference for
what the buyer expects a price to be. Steve Jobs used this concept in
his introduction of the iPad. The anchor price he quoted was \$999. This
immediately made buyers believe the product should be priced around
\$999. However, when Jobs showed the actual price, starting at \$499,
the buyers immediately believed, psychologically, that it was a great
deal. Viewers did not know what the worth of the iPad was; they just
believed they were saving nearly \$500 by having the initial anchor of
\$999.

## Artificial Time Constraints {#sect-00009}

Marketers---particularly retailers---often use the psychological
strategy of artificial time constraints. These trigger a sense of
urgency in the buyer; if they don't buy today, they'll miss out on a
great deal. Whereas a consumer may have been on the fence about spending
money, these artificial time constraints act as a catalyst for consumers
to spend money right now. And there is a lot of power in artificial
constraints: consumers are afraid of missing out and don't want to later
regret not buying. But consumers can often find the same prices many
times throughout the year because retailers use this tactic frequently.

## Price Appearance {#sect-00010}

A study on the effects of auditory representation in pricing showed that
buyers believed \$1,555.83 was a very complicated price and difficult to
comprehend quickly. The study further outlined that a price of \$1,555
(no cents) was *better* but that buyers were able to more easily and
quickly comprehend a price of \$1555 (no commas) and thus more likely to
pause and consider the product.

If you've ever gone to a fancy restaurant, you may have noticed the
prices on the menu are in a small font and don't have zeros at the end.
The price will be listed as \$29 instead of \$29.00. Psychologically,
longer prices appear to be more expensive because they take longer to
read. This effect is augmented by the use of a dollar sign. Similarly,
the use of prices with multiple syllables seems more expensive because
consumers pronounce the prices in their head. In short, the longer it
takes to read and pronounce, the more impact the buyer believes it has
on their wallet, which is explained by price appearance.

## Price Gouging {#sect-00011}

Price gouging is when companies or individuals take advantage of a
situation, typically an emergency or natural disaster, and charge
exceptionally high prices for products or services. In some states, like
New York, it's illegal for businesses to price gouge during a state of
emergency. In fact, New York was the first state to enact a price
gouging law. In 1978, when there was a shortage of oil for heating in
the winter and the lives of young and elderly people were threatened,
the state created a law where companies could not sell goods or services
at excessive prices.

Can you think of recent examples where price gouging was a potential
concern? During the COVID-19 pandemic, several states posted on their
government websites lists of items that couldn't be subject to price
gouging. Currently, the US Department of Justice provides a list of
items that can't be hoarded or subject to price gouging due to COVID-19
precautions, including masks and other personal protective equipment
(PPE), respirators, ventilators, and medical gowns. There have been
other instances where price gouging was an issue. According to
AccuWeather, "some of the most rampant examples of price gouging came
during the most destructive storms in recent years, such as Hurricane
Katrina, Hurricane Sandy, Hurricane Harvey, and Hurricane Irma." After
Hurricane Katrina, a hotel manager boosted room prices and was sentence
to five years in jail.

:::: {#note-00012 .note}
::: title
Pricing Analyst
:::

A pricing analyst studies the market and analyzes data to determine the
best pricing for products. [This article from Zippia provides helpful
information about](#) the job role, including qualifications, career
paths, salary, education, resume templates, and online courses to
improve skills. Indeed.com [also provides a thorough job description](#)
that outlines top duties and qualifications.

The best way to understand the core of any job is to learn from people
who have done the job. Watch this video from a pricing analyst where he
discusses his career.

[What does a Pricing Analyst do?](#)

Also [check out this article on what makes a great pricing analyst](#).
Some people wonder how a pricing analyst and a data analyst differ.
Learn the answer to that [question in this article](#).

Once you've determined this may be the career for you, prepare for an
interview by watching this video.

[YouTube Video](#)
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00012}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00013}

:::: {#rf-005 .note}
::: title
:::

5\.

Charles Fishman, "Which Price Is Right?,"

Fast Company

, February 28, 2003,
https://www.fastcompany.com/46061/which-price-right.
::::

:::: {#rf-006 .note}
::: title
:::

6\.

Steve Jobs, "2010 Apple iPad Keynote," Apple Soldier, January 28, 2010,
YouTube video, 1:32:35,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lTNbKCAFHJo&t=4453s.
::::

:::: {#rf-007 .note}
::: title
:::

7\.

Keith S. Coulter, Pilsik Choi, and Kent B. Monroe, "Comma n' Cents in
Pricing: The Effects of Auditory Representation Encoding on Price
Magnitude Perceptions,"

Journal of Consumer Psychology

22, no. 3 (July 2012): 395--407,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcps.2011.11.005.
::::

:::: {#rf-008 .note}
::: title
:::

8\.

Eric Yu, "What Is Psychological Pricing? 4 Strategies, Examples, and
Tactics," Price Intelligently, ProfitWell, updated June 28, 2021,
https://www.priceintelligently.com/blog/bid/181764/psychological-pricing-strategy-where-s-your-head-at.
::::

:::: {#rf-009 .note}
::: title
:::

9\.

Yu, "What Is Psychological Pricing?"
::::

:::: {#rf-010 .note}
::: title
:::

10\.

"Price Gouging Is Illegal," NYC Department of Consumer and Worker
Protection, City of New York, accessed May 31, 2022,
https://www1.nyc.gov/site/dca/media/Face-Masks-in-Short-Supply-Due-to-COVID-19.page.
::::

:::: {#rf-011 .note}
::: title
:::

11\.

Christopher E. Ondeck et al., "State Price Gouging Laws and Price
Controls: A Historical View on a Questionable Objective,"

The National Law Review

, September 18, 2020,
https://www.natlawreview.com/article/state-price-gouging-laws-and-price-controls-historical-view-questionable-objective.
::::

:::: {#rf-012 .note}
::: title
:::

12\.

"Combating Price Gouging & Hoarding," Coronavirus Response, United
States Department of Justice, updated March 23, 2022,
https://www.justice.gov/coronavirus/combatingpricegouginghoarding.
::::

:::: {#rf-013 .note}
::: title
:::

13\.

Mark Puleo, "The History of Price Gouging amid US Disasters and How
Different States Fight against It," AccuWeather, last modified July 1,
2019,
https://www.accuweather.com/en/weather-news/the-history-of-price-gouging-amid-us-disasters-and-how-different-states-fight-against-it/344793.
::::

:::: {#rf-014 .note}
::: title
:::

14\.

Puleo, "History of Price Gouging."
::::

# 

artificial time constraints

pricing strategy that creates a sense of urgency in buyers' minds

customer-driven objective

product pricing based on what a customer is willing to pay for a product
or service

fixed costs

costs of doing business that do not change based on number of units
produced

price

the exchange of something of value between a buyer and seller

price anchoring

a frame of reference for a buyer to set an expectation of a price

price appearance

the way in which a customer perceives a price based on how it is
visually represented

price gouging

when companies take advantage of a situation, typically an emergency or
natural disaster, and charge exceptionally high prices for products or
services

profit

the financial gain of a company

total costs

total expenses of doing business

total revenue

the money generated from normal business operations
