m00077

9c480f5d-d12a-432a-838b-1b3963e36ec4

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

List the five critical Cs of pricing.

Characterize the five critical Cs of pricing.

# Cost {#sect-00002}

What should you charge for a product or service? As you've probably
discovered by now, pricing is not something that marketers approach
without a lot of research. Using the five critical Cs of pricing can
help to determine the *best* price---one that provides optimal value to
the buyer and profit maximization for the company. [\#](#) illustrates
the five critical Cs to consider when pricing: cost, customers, channels
of distribution, competition, and compatibility.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Cost is the most obvious element of the pricing decisions. As we've
already discussed, you must know the cost of doing business---both fixed
and variable---before you can set an adequate price. However, cost alone
cannot be the only basis on which a pricing decision made. After all,
buyers never know (and don't care) how much it costs a business to
produce its goods and services.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
The Five Critical Cs of Pricing
:::

Scale Finance has [provided an excellent article](#) that may help you
get your mind around the five Cs of pricing.
::::

# Customers {#sect-00003}

Customers are another key element to pricing decisions, as you've
learned already in this chapter. Marketers must determine not only what
customers expect a product or service to be priced at but also what
those customers are willing to pay. Toyota manufactures cars and markets
them toward the middle class. Through research, it has determined what
its target market is willing and able to pay for a particular vehicle.
Alternatively, Lexus, which is marketed as more of a luxury car, has a
higher price point and is marketed to a different market than that of
Toyota.

# Channels of Distribution {#sect-00004}

Many products are sold through channels of distribution---intermediaries
who move products from manufacturer to end users. Intermediaries affect
the prices of products because they also need to maximize their profits.
Therefore, pricing decisions must consider profits, expenses, and the
value they are adding to the product or service.

IKEA began as a mail-order catalog in 1953 in Älmhult, Sweden. Today, it
is a global home furnishings brand that focuses on sustainability. Its
distribution channel consists of the manufacturer, dealer, wholesaler,
and retailer. Each of these channel members are in business to make a
profit. Therefore, the price strategy that IKEA utilizes must help to
ensure that each member is financially satisfied while making a profit
itself and keeping the price that is of value to the end user. If any of
the channel members (or the end user) does not find value in the price
set by IKEA, the entire channel becomes weak and unsustainable.

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
IKEA
:::

IKEA is a very interesting company to study when you are learning about
marketing and business. As this [blog examines](#), it has 1,600
suppliers for manufacturing products that deliver to 186 global stores.
That's a complex---and successful---system!

The [MBA Skool website](#) provides an explanation of the IKEA marketing
strategy and the four Ps, including IKEA's distribution model.

The [Contact Pigeon blog outlines](#) IKEA's strategy that made it the
successful company it is today.
::::

# Competition {#sect-00005}

Every company and product faces competition. Even the most unique
products are competing for buyer dollars. Buyers' perception of one
product in comparison to that of alternatives has an important impact on
pricing decisions. Gazelle Bikes is a top-tier manufacturer of bicycles.
The bikes offered by Gazelle have a starting price point of \$1,499. One
of Gazelle's competitors, Giant, has a starting price point of \$1,720.
For bicycle enthusiasts, these price points are important when comparing
one brand with another; an enthusiast who comes across a new brand of
bicycles with a starting price of just \$200 would not position it with
Gazelle and Giant bicycles.

# Compatibility {#sect-00006}

Panama City Beach has been one of the most popular spring break
destinations of college students for decades. In fact, it is considered
the "Spring Break Capital of the World." It is well-known for its
late-night parties, concerts, and celebrity sightings. Hotels and clubs
along the beach of Panama City drive their marketing efforts toward this
segment of the market: college-aged spring break--goers. The prices they
set for the weeks of spring break are compatible with both this segment
of the market's ability to pay and the businesses' profitability.
Conversely, hotels in areas of Florida that are more family-friendly set
prices that are considered a value for families and promote the hotels
toward families rather than college-aged partygoers.

Pricing decisions are not made in a vacuum. When marketers set a price
for a good or service, it must be consistent with the other marketing
objectives. Imagine if McDonald's starting offering a \$20.00 ribeye
steak. This decision would be inconsistent with the marketing of the
company's low-priced fast food, would be confusing to customers, and
thus would not be successful.

:::: {#note-00008 .note}
::: title
The Five Cs of Pricing
:::

The five Cs of pricing has long been a standard for marketing
practitioners. However, some practitioners also consider another area
when determining price: context. Context refers to a more complex
strategy of pricing where marketers set---and change---prices according
to variables external to the company. For example, an ice cream truck in
the US Midwest would arguably have more traffic during the peak summer
hours and less during the colder winter months. The owner of the ice
cream truck would change their prices to best fit the context (in this
case, weather). The product (ice cream) remains the same regardless of
the price, but the price is changed to fit the context of the situation.
The appropriateness of using this strategy depends on several factors,
including the product category, market size, and other nuances of the
industry.
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00007}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00008}

:::: {#rf-015 .note}
::: title
:::

15\.

"This Is IKEA," IKEA, accessed June 1, 2022,
https://www.ikea.com/us/en/this-is-ikea/.
::::

:::: {#rf-016 .note}
::: title
:::

16\.

"eBikes," Gazelle Bikes, Royal Dutch Gazelle, accessed June 11, 2022,
https://www.gazellebikes.com/en-us/ebikes.
::::

:::: {#rf-017 .note}
::: title
:::

17\.

"Full Suspension Mountain Bikes," Liv Cycling, accessed June 11, 2022,
https://www.liv-cycling.com/us/bikes/mountain-bikes/full-suspension.
::::

:::: {#rf-018 .note}
::: title
:::

18\.

Panama City Beach Spring Break (website), CMG, accessed June 11, 2022,
https://www.pcbeachspringbreak.com.
::::

:::: {#rf-019 .note}
::: title
:::

19\.

"The 5 Critical Cs of Pricing," Scale Finance, accessed May 30, 2022,
https://scalefinance.com/the-5-critical-cs-of-pricing/.
::::
