m00078

a68cfb06-562b-4447-8799-ea24955dc9a5

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

List the five-step procedure for establishing pricing policy.

Describe ways to determine the pricing objective.

Identify ways to estimate demand.

List ways to estimate costs.

Explain how to analyze the external environment.

Discuss selecting pricing strategies or tactics.

# Determine Pricing Objectives {#sect-00002}

Whether a product is new to the market or established, marketers face
the challenge of setting prices. Recall that the main objective for
pricing is for the buyer to perceive value in the product while the
company maximizes profits. Marketers often use a five-step approach for
establishing pricing policies (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

During the first step in establishing pricing policies, the marketing
team will set the pricing objectives (see [\#](#)). The most common
pricing objectives are based on customer value, cost, sales orientation,
market share, target return, competition, and being customer-driven. It
is not uncommon for more than one objective to be set within the
company. Let's take a look at each of the pricing objectives in more
detail.

  *Objective*         *Description*
  ------------------- -------------------------------------------------
  Customer value      Based on a product's added value
  Cost                Based on the cost to produce a product
  Sales orientation   Developed to boost sales volume(s) of a product
  Market share        Focused on increasing market share
  Target return       Focused on a specific profit at a specific time
  Competition         Developed based on competitors' prices
  Customer driven     Focus on what the customer is willing to pay

  : Pricing Objectives {#table-00001}

## Customer Value--Based Objective {#sect-00003}

As you've already learned, it's essential to have a deep understanding
of the value a product will provide for customers. Before Jim Semick and
his team launched GoToMeeting, a conferencing app, they developed the
pricing of \$49 "all you can meet flat-rate pricing." This pricing was
unique to the industry, and Semick stated that they determined this
pricing structure based on dozens of interviews with potential
customers. From these interviews, the GoToMeeting team discovered key
areas that would provide value to customers not only through the product
itself, but also through the flat-rate price structure that was easy to
understand. Semick utilized the customer value--based objective, one in
which the company has a good understanding of the value-added benefits
of a product and sets its price accordingly.

## Cost-Based Objective {#sect-00004}

A fairly simple way to price products and services is using the
cost-based objective. This pricing objective sets prices based on the
costs of doing business, which were explained earlier in the chapter.
The biggest pitfall of utilizing this pricing objective is that it might
not align well with the customer's value perception. Remember, customers
don't know (or care) what the cost of doing business is, so long as they
receive value in their purchase. Therefore, marketers run the risk of
overpricing the product. Marketers using this objective also run the
risk of pricing their products too low and failing to maximize profits.

Consider the manufacturing of a smartphone. Assume the total cost to the
manufacturer to produce one smartphone is \$3,000. This cost includes
all expenses to the company for producing this one smartphone (product
costs, variable and fixed expenses). The company chooses to set the
selling price of this smartphone to include these costs plus a profit of
10 percent, which sets the final price at \$3,300 (3,000 + 10% × 3,000).

## Sales-Oriented Objective {#sect-00005}

A company may wish to seek a boost in sales volume of a product. In this
case, marketers would choose the sales-oriented objective. The goal of a
sales-oriented objective is to increase the volume, or units sold, of a
product against the company's sales over a period of time. This
objective is achieved by raising or lowering prices to increase sales.
An increase in sales assumes a direct impact on profits, thus maximizing
profits. Consider the smartphone manufacturer again. Executives have set
a sales goal of 1,000 units within the first quarter. Marketers may
choose to lower the price of the smartphone to meet the goal. So perhaps
the company changes the price from \$3,300 to \$3,100 for a short period
of time until the sales goal is reached. Note that it is still covering
the cost to manufacture the product and still making some profit.

## Market Share--Oriented Objective {#sect-00006}

A market share--oriented objective is one in which the company's pricing
objective is to set prices based on those of the competition. This
strategy involves comparing similar products being offered in the market
and pricing at, below, or above those prices depending on the products
offering. The cell phone market is one example of an industry that leans
on market share orientation. The biggest suppliers of cell
phones---Apple, Google, and Samsung ---take their pricing cues from one
another and are priced very similarly.

## Target Return Objective {#sect-00007}

A target return objective is one in which marketers calculate the price
so that it returns a specific profit in a given period of time. Let's
assume that a company has invested \$1 million into a new product.
Company executives wish to recuperate 10 percent of those costs in year
one of sales. If it costs the company \$2 to manufacture one unit of
product and marketers estimate that it will sell 50,000 products in the
first year, marketers know they will need to price the product high
enough that it will yield the desired results. The obvious drawback to
this objective is that much of the decision is based on estimations of
units sold in a given time frame.

## Competition Objective {#sect-00008}

A competition-based objective, as its name suggests, is when a company
sets its prices according to the prices of its competitors. Amazon uses
this pricing objective often with some of its most popular products.
Using data intelligence, the company gathers the prices of products of
its competitors and sets its prices just below the price set by
competitors.

## Customer-Driven Objective {#sect-00009}

Some companies choose to set prices based on customer-driven
objectives---that is, what the customer is willing to pay for a product
or service. Auctions, e-trades, and bids are common examples of
customer-driven objectives. eBay, for example, allows a company (or
individual) to place an item for sale on its website. Often, the
interested buyer will bid on the item, thus stating what they are
willing to pay. The highest bidder is then able to buy the product.

# Estimate Demand {#sect-00010}

After setting the pricing objectives, marketers will estimate the
product or services demand. Demand is an economic term that refers to
the buyer's desire and willingness to purchase a product or service at
various prices. All other factors being consistent, an increase in price
will result in a decrease in demand. The demand curve is a visual
representation to understand demand.

## Understanding the Demand Curve {#sect-00011}

The demand curve is a graph that shows how the demand for a product or
service varies with the change in price. As you can see from [\#](#),
the price (p) is located on the vertical axis and the quantity (q)
demanded is located on the horizontal axis. As the price of a product
increases, the demand of the product decreases.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

The relationship between price and demand shown in the figure above is
contingent on certain conditions remaining constant. Such conditions
include substitute goods, personal income, and consumer tastes, which
are discussed further below. Changes in these conditions can cause a
change in demand that might not follow this basic concept of the demand
curve.

## The Demand Curve for Prestige Products {#sect-00012}

One pricing strategy that negates the demand curve is prestige pricing.
Prestige pricing is a strategy that marketers use to set high prices
knowing that demand will increase with higher prices because the higher
price increases the perceived value of the product. Prestige pricing is
closely tied to brand image and appeals to buyers who see value in
elevated status. Consider these brands of shoes. The Adidas Yeezy Boost
750 costs around \$76 to produce but sometimes sells for over \$1,000,
while the D Rose 5 Boost costs around \$43 and sells for around \$100.
So why the large price difference? The Yeezy Boost 750 pricing strategy
is that of prestige pricing. The allure and exclusivity of the Yeezy
Boost 750 allowed the company to price the shoes at a much higher price.

:::: {#note-00005 .note}
::: title
Prestige Pricing
:::

[In this article, HubSpot explores](#) the pros and cons to prestige
pricing and things to consider when implementing this strategy. Included
are several prestige pricing examples such as the Adidas Yeezy Boost and
the D Rose 5 Boost, diamonds, cars, AirPods, and T-shirts.
::::

## Demand Elasticity {#sect-00013}

What will be the impact of demand for a product if the price is changed?
If the product is discounted, will demand increase? If the price goes
up, will demand decrease? The concept of demand elasticity helps
marketers answer these questions. In short, demand elasticity is a
measure of the change in the quantity demanded in relation to the change
in its price. Mathematically, it is derived from the percent change in
quantity demanded divided by the percent change in price. If you have
been considering buying a new home, would the prices of homes sway your
decision? Perhaps so. Home prices are considered elastic because the
price has a huge impact on the demand for new homes. Additionally, there
are many options for housing, including apartments, roommates, living
with relatives, condos, etc.

As a second example, consider gasoline. Since we need gasoline to get to
work, school, the grocery store, and meetups with friends, it is
considered relatively inelastic. There are very few substitutes for
gasoline. Because gasoline has inelastic demand, the price may fluctuate
considerably, but the demand for gasoline remains relatively the same.
Consider the higher gas prices of 2022, averaging over \$5.00/gallon
across the United States and even higher globally. Even though the
prices have risen, the demand for gasoline has not changed because
people still must travel to work and other essential places.

In summary, if a product is determined to be inelastic, the demanded
quantity does not change with a change in price. Conversely, if the
product is elastic, the demanded quantity will change with a change in
price. You might be asking: What makes a product elastic or inelastic?
There are several factors that will help determine how elastic a product
or service will be.

## Factors in Demand Elasticity {#sect-00014}

When determining the demand elasticity of products and services, there
are several factors to keep in mind. These include substitutes, the
effect of income, time, and cross-elasticity of demand (see [\#](#)).
Let's explore each of these in depth.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

## Availability of Substitutes {#sect-00015}

Substitutes are products and services that are similar to the one being
offered. If a buyer can easily choose a different product when the
prices change, the demand will be more elastic. For example, if you are
at the grocery store to buy English muffins but the store is out, you
can easily choose to purchase bagels instead. Conversely, if there are
relatively few or no alternatives, demand will be more inelastic.
Consider the generic need for gasoline. It is fairly inelastic. The
availability of substitutes for car travel is inconvenient. However, the
demand for gasoline at specific gas stations is considered elastic
because buyers can choose the gas station they prefer based on price. If
two gas stations are located within a convenient geographic region to
the buyer, they will choose the station that has lower prices.

## Income {#sect-00016}

Buyers have limited money to spend on their needs and must make
decisions on how the purchase of goods and services will impact their
total income. The income effect is the way in which buyers see the
change in price affecting their real income. Generally, an increase in
price indicates that the buyer will have less money left over to spend;
therefore, they will choose to buy less of a product, decreasing demand.
The opposite is also true: the lower a price, the more money buyers have
to buy more of the product, thus increasing demand. Consider the 8.6
percent inflation that the United States saw between May 2021 and May
2022. Because inflation is a general rise in prices, consumers noticed
that their purchases of goods and services caused their real income to
decline. In other words, consumers had less money to spend on products
and ultimately chose to purchase less of those products.

## Time {#sect-00017}

When the price of a good or service is changed, it takes time for buyers
to adjust to the change in price. The time factor of price elasticity
indicates that the product's elasticity of demand is dependent upon the
time it takes buyers to adjust to the new prices. For example, if there
is a sharp decrease in the price of automobiles, buyers would not
immediately go out and buy a new vehicle. Rather, it would take some
time to save money for a down payment, secure a loan, and generally go
through the buying process. Therefore, the demand for automobiles would
increase, but over time rather than immediately.

## Cross-Elasticity of Demand {#sect-00018}

What happens when one of two similar products has a price increase or
decrease? If the price of coffee increases, it would be expected that
the demand of tea (a substitute product) would also increase. Buyers see
the price increase and look for lower-priced substitutes to replace the
higher-priced item. The cross-elasticity of demand measures the amount
demanded of one good when the price for a similar good or service
changes.

# Estimate Costs {#sect-00019}

The next step in determining a pricing policy is to estimate the total
cost of producing a product or service. Recall that maximizing profits
is the goal of a pricing strategy and marketers must factor the cost of
doing business into pricing considerations. When estimating total costs,
it is important to divide costs into fixed and variable costs.

## Fixed and Variable Costs {#sect-00020}

As mentioned earlier in this chapter, costs are categorized as either
fixed or variable. Fixed costs are those expenses that do not change
regardless of the number of units sold. Consider the example used
earlier in the chapter of manufacturing a smartphone. If the company
manufacturers 1,000 or 100,000 smartphones, the company must pay the
same amount for its lease on the property the plant is located on. The
lease payment does not change based on the number of units produced.
Alternatively, variable costs do change based on the number of units
produced. In this same example, the amount manufacturing spends is
dependent on the number of smartphones produced.

# Analyze the External Environment {#sect-00021}

The fourth step in determining prices is to analyze the external
environment. The external environment is comprised of factors outside of
the organization that impact marketing decisions. While marketers cannot
directly change these factors, they should be aware of how they might
impact pricing decisions.

One way to remember the factors of the external environment is through
the acronym PESTLE: political, economic, social, technological, legal,
and environmental. Questions to consider in a PESTLE analysis when
analyzing the external environment as it relates to pricing are included
in [\#](#).

  *Factors*       *Question*                                                             *Example*
  --------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Political       What is the current political situation as it relates to the market?   A price cap on certain pharmaceuticals would limit the price a company could charge.
  Economic        What is the current economic climate?                                  During inflation or deflation, prices may need to increase or decrease.
  Social          How is culture changing or shaping the industry?                       During the latter months of the year, the Indian market purchases more vehicles than at other times of the year.
  Technological   What technologies are trending?                                        If technology for a product is becoming obsolete, a decrease in price may be necessary.
  Legal           What current legislation is impacting the industry?                    A new vehicle emission law may require new technology, thus increasing the price of vehicles.
  Environmental   What are the environmental concerns of the product?                    A highly toxic product or process may need to have a higher price to properly and safely dispose of byproducts.

  : PESTLE Factors {#table-00002}

:::: {#note-00010 .note}
::: title
PESTLE Analysis
:::

There are hundreds of online resources that discuss PESTLE. Here are a
few to start with:

The Corporate Finance Institute provides a

PESTLE walk-through

.

The Oxford College of Marketing outlines the

advantages and disadvantages of a PESTLE analysis

.

Business-to-you provides a video, sample analysis, and a full list of
PESTLE factors

.
::::

## Competitors' Costs, Prices, and Products {#sect-00022}

It probably seems obvious by now that analyzing the competition is key
in setting prices. Marketers must constantly analyze both current and
potential competition in the market to understand how their products
will measure up to that of the competition. If a competitor is planning
to introduce a nearly identical product to one that your organization
already has on the market---but at a much lower price---you will need to
consider how that will affect your sales as well as analyze how it is
offering such a lower price. Should you lower your price? Consider
changing suppliers for lowered costs? Take a cut in profits to stay
competitive? All of these questions, and more, will help you as a
marketer determine what pricing strategy should be used.

## Stage in the Product Life Cycle {#sect-00023}

How long a product---and its substitutes---have been in the market will
have an impact on the marketer's choice of pricing strategies. Recall
that the product life cycle consists of four stages: introduction,
growth, maturity, and decline. During the introduction stage, marketers
must choose pricing strategies wisely to capture the intended market and
begin recuperating research and development costs. As a product moves
through the other stages of the life cycle, prices may need to be
changed in order to stay relevant to consumers.

## Status of the Economy {#sect-00024}

As you can imagine, the state of the economy at any given time will have
an impact on the buyer's ability to purchase products as well as their
willingness to spend. Economic factors that marketers should
specifically be aware of when considering demand for products include
employment, inflation, interest rates, and consumer confidence.

One of the main factors that influences consumer demand is the
employment rate. The unemployment rate is a measure of the number of
people who are not employed but are actively seeking work in a given
period---usually one month. When buyers are employed and receiving
steady income, they are more likely to use discretionary income.
Discretionary income is the money left over after all taxes and
necessities---such as food and housing---are paid. When discretionary
income decreases, demand for nonessential items also decreases.

Inflation is an economic measure of the rate of rising prices of goods
and services in an economy. When inflation incurs, prices for most goods
and services rise. Therefore, the amount of discretionary income a buyer
has decreases, and demand for nonessential goods and services also
decreases. Consider the high inflation in the United States economy from
2021 to 2022, which was 8.6 percent as of May 2022. The rate of
inflation is currently the highest that it has been since 1981. Because
of the higher price of goods and services within the economy, consumers
are spending more of their earned income on necessities such as food and
shelter. This, in turn, causes them to purchase fewer nonessential items
such as vacations, toys, and the like. Inflation also impacts pensions
and other retirement accounts, so as inflation rises considerably,
people are even less likely to spend their discretionary income and more
likely to save anything left over after essentials for future use.

Even consumers who do not have a deep understanding of the economy have
some degree of optimism regarding the overall state of the economy. This
is known as consumer confidence---it measures how optimistic consumers
are about the economy and their own finances. When consumers have little
optimism in the economy, they are more likely to save their
discretionary income rather than spend it.

The overall status of the economy---both current and future---is
important for marketers to be aware of as it has a direct impact on the
ability and willingness of buyers to spend money. Choosing pricing
strategies that are aligned with the health of economy will have a
greater chance of success.

# Select Pricing Strategies or Tactics {#sect-00025}

After gathering all the data explained in previous steps, marketers are
ready to set specific pricing strategies or tactics. The strategies and
tactics chosen for a product or service should align with the other
marketing mix elements, create value for the customer, and maximize
profits for the company. In the next section, we will discuss specific
strategies and tactics and how to optimize each.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00026}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00027}

:::: {#rf-020 .note}
::: title
:::

20\.

Jim Semick, "SaaS Pricing: How to Price Software Products," Pragmatic
Institute, May 20, 2015,
https://www.pragmaticinstitute.com/resources/articles/product/how-to-price-saas-products/.
::::

:::: {#rf-021 .note}
::: title
:::

21\.

Hitesh Bhasin, "Cost-Based Pricing: Definition, Types, Examples,
Advantages and Disadvantages," Marketing91, August 30, 2021,
https://www.marketing91.com/cost-based-pricing/.
::::

:::: {#rf-022 .note}
::: title
:::

22\.

Patrick Campbell, "What Is Market-Based Pricing: Advantages &
Disadvantage (+Examples)," Recur, ProfitWell, February 19, 2020,
https://www.profitwell.com/recur/all/market-based-pricing.
::::

:::: {#rf-023 .note}
::: title
:::

23\.

"Competitive Pricing: Definition, Advantages & Disadvantages,"

Prisync Blog

, Prisync, October 18, 2018,
https://prisync.com/blog/competitive-pricing-advantages-vs-disadvantages/.
::::

:::: {#rf-024 .note}
::: title
:::

24\.

Jay Fuchs, "A Crash Course on Prestige Pricing (with Real-Life
Examples),"

The HubSpot Sales Blog

, HubSpot, last modified October 15, 2021,
https://blog.hubspot.com/sales/prestige-pricing.
::::

:::: {#rf-025 .note}
::: title
:::

25\.

Mary Hall, "Elasticity vs. Inelasticity of Demand: What's the
Difference?," Investopedia, Dotdash Meredith, updated June 30, 2022,
https://www.investopedia.com/ask/answers/012915/what-difference-between-inelasticity-and-elasticity-demand.asp.
::::

:::: {#rf-026 .note}
::: title
:::

26\.

Eliana Eitches and Vera Crain, "Using Gasoline Data to Explain
Inelasticity,"

Beyond the Numbers

5, no. 5 (March 2016),
https://www.bls.gov/opub/btn/volume-5/using-gasoline-data-to-explain-inelasticity.htm.
::::

:::: {#rf-027 .note}
::: title
:::

27\.

Adam Hayes, "Cross Price Elasticity: Definition, Formula for
Calculation, and Example," Investopedia, Dotdash Meredith, updated July
31, 2022,
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/cross-elasticity-demand.asp.
::::

:::: {#rf-028 .note}
::: title
:::

28\.

Francis Joseph Aguilar,

Scanning the Business Environment

(New York: Macmillan, 1967).
::::

:::: {#rf-029 .note}
::: title
:::

29\.

J. B. Maverick, "Which Economic Factors Most Affect the Demand for
Consumer Goods?," Investopedia, Dotdash Meredith, updated March 17,
2022,
https://www.investopedia.com/ask/answers/042815/which-economic-factors-most-affect-demand-consumer-goods.asp.
::::

:::: {#rf-030 .note}
::: title
:::

30\.

"Historical Inflation Rates: 1914--2022," US Inflation Calculator,
CoinNews Media Group, last modified May 11, 2022,
https://www.usinflationcalculator.com/inflation/historical-inflation-rates/.
::::

:::: {#rf-031 .note}
::: title
:::

31\.

Kimberly Amadeo, "How Inflation Impacts Your Life," The Balance, Dotdash
Meredith, updated December 31, 2021,
https://www.thebalance.com/inflation-impact-on-economy-3306102.
::::

:::: {#rf-032 .note}
::: title
:::

32\.

"US Consumer Confidence," The Conference Board, updated August 30, 2022,
https://www.conference-board.org/data/consumerconfidence.cfm.
::::

# 

competition-based objective

product pricing based on the prices of a company's competitors

consumer confidence

an economic indicator that measures the degree of optimism that
consumers have regarding the overall state of the country's economy and
their own financial situations

cost-based objective

product pricing based on the costs of doing business

cross-elasticity of demand

the change in price of one good or service as a similar good or
service's price changes

customer value--based objective

product pricing based on a company's understanding of the value-added
benefits of a product

demand

a buyer's ability and willingness to purchase a specific product or
service

demand curve

a graph that illustrates the relationship between demand and price

demand elasticity

measure of the change in the quantity demanded in relation to the change
in its price

discretionary income

a household's money that is left over after all taxes and necessities
are paid

income effect

the perception buyers have of how price changes will affect their income

inflation

an economic measure of the rate of rising prices of goods and services
in an economy

market share--oriented objective

setting prices at, below, or above competitors in an effort to increase
market share

prestige pricing

a strategy marketers use to set high prices knowing that demand will
increase with higher prices because the higher price increases the
perceived value of the product

sales-oriented objective

setting prices based on the goal of increasing the volume of sales

substitutes

products and services that are similar to the one being offered

target return objective

setting prices so they return a specific profit during a given period of
time

unemployment rate

measure of the number of people not employed in an economy during a
given period of time

variable costs

costs that vary based on the number of units produced
