m00079

40051640-09c7-4a04-84ba-d8cd23211b97

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

List the pricing strategies for new products.

Explain each pricing strategy for new products.

# Price Skimming {#sect-00002}

When a new product is introduced to the market, marketers often use one
of three pricing strategies. Remember that when a company introduces a
new product to the market, a good deal of financial resources have
already been used even before the first unit is sold. Therefore, it is
important for marketers to choose an appropriate price that both appeals
to buyers and helps to recuperate the costs of research and development
so that the company can begin to maximize profits more quickly.

Price skimming is a new-product strategy in which marketers choose to
initially set a high price for a product or service and lower it over
time. The goal of price skimming is to attract the segment of the market
that is willing to pay the highest possible price for the product. Once
achieved, the price is lowered to attract another segment of the market
and so on. The term *skimming* comes from the skimming the cream, layer
by layer, from raw milk---or in this case, each segment of customers.

Innovative technology often uses price skimming. For example, when Sony
launched the PlayStation 3, it was set at a fairly high price of \$599.
With little competition and a well-established brand, it was successful.
Each year thereafter, it lowered the price---and gained new
customers---until it eventually reached a price of \$299.

# Market Penetration Pricing {#sect-00003}

The opposite of price skimming is penetration pricing. The penetration
pricing strategy is one in which the new product or service is set at
the lowest price possible. This strategy's objective is to penetrate the
market, or gain as many customers in all segments as possible from the
beginning of the product life cycle.

In the late 1990s, Netflix introduced its movie rental service. For a
monthly subscription fee, users could rent four movies at a time with no
return date. The low initial price targeted the most segments of the
market and allowed customers to try the new service with little effort
or financial impact.

# Break-Even Pricing {#sect-00004}

Break-even pricing is a pricing strategy in which marketers choose a
price that will cover all of the costs of manufacturing. The break-even
point is when the number of units produced equals the revenue for the
product. The break-even point will produce zero profit but will cover
all associated costs.

The break-even formula is calculated by dividing the total fixed costs
by the production unit price minus variable unit costs. The break-even
point in units will tell a marketer exactly how many units must be sold
in order to start making a profit.

$${Break}~{Even} = \frac{{Fixed}~{Costs}}{({Unit}~{Price} - {Variable}~{Unit}~{Costs})}$$

Let's look at an example. Assume you are opening a new gourmet cookie
shop and you have estimated your projected costs. You'd like to know how
many units you must sell in order to break even and then start making a
profit. Let's assume your fixed costs are \$20,000. This includes rent,
deliveries, ingredients, and new signage. You have estimated your
variable costs to be \$1.50 per unit, or cookie. You plan to charge
\$2.00 per cookie. How many units must you sell to break even? Using the
formula above, you find that you must sell 40,000 cookies in order to
break even.

$$\begin{matrix}
{{Break}~{Even}~} & = & {~\frac{\$ 20,000}{\left( \$ 2.00~ - ~\$ 1.50 \right)~}} \\
{{Break}~{Even}~} & = & {~\frac{\$ 20,000}{\left( \$ 0.50 \right)~}} \\
 & = & {~40,000~{Units}}
\end{matrix}$$

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00005}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00006}

:::: {#rf-033 .note}
::: title
:::

33\.

Bharath Sivakumar, "Price Skimming: Definition, Strategy, & Examples,"
Feedough, July 17, 2021,
https://www.feedough.com/price-skimming-definition-examples/.
::::

# 

break-even pricing

pricing strategy in which marketers choose a price that will cover all
the costs of manufacturing

penetration pricing

new product or service strategy that sets the lowest price possible in
order to reach the majority of the market in the introduction stage

price skimming

pricing strategy in which a company initially sets a high price for a
product or service and lowers it over time as new segments of the market
are reached
