m00080

ffb1a8b5-3e4b-4d38-8597-a62841a01230

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

List the pricing strategies and tactics for existing products.

Provide examples of each pricing strategy and tactic.

# Product Line Pricing {#sect-00002}

More often than not, marketers must make pricing decisions on existing
products rather than new products. As products go through the product
life cycle, price changes will likely need to occur to maintain value
for customers and continue to maximize profits. Some common strategies
and tactics for existing products are discussed next.

Many large companies offer multiple products and product lines in their
product mix. One strategy for pricing products is to price products in a
product line the same or similar. For example, Unilever is the
manufacturer of many brands that you've likely heard of: Dove, Axe, and
Hellman's to name a few. Within its host of products, Unilever has
divided its products into price categories; higher priced items have a
higher perception of value and so on. (Recall that a product line is a
group of related products differentiated by features and price.)
Unilever sets a higher price for some of its product lines and lower
price points for others in order to capture various target markets,
known as product line pricing (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# Captive Product Pricing {#sect-00003}

Assume you need to purchase a new printer for your home computer. Once
you buy the printer, you're also going to need to purchase what? That's
right, ink. Captive product pricing uses a strategy that requires both a
core product and a captive product. In the above example, the core
product is the printer and the captive product is the ink. When you are
shopping for the printer, you are likely to take into consideration the
price you will have to pay for ink as well. Marketers may price the
printer at a very reasonable price, knowing it will catch your attention
and thus make the price of the ink seem less expensive. Captive product
pricing maximizes profits by intentionally pricing both the core and
captive products at a level that will increase the perceived value to
consumers.

# Bundle Pricing {#sect-00004}

Bundle pricing is another popular pricing strategy that marketers use to
promote purchasing multiple products at once. Consider when you go to
the drive-through at your favorite fast-food establishment. Ever notice
that it is cheaper or nearly so to purchase a "meal" than each item
individually? Have you ever gone to the drive-through intending to get a
cheeseburger but feel compelled to get the value meal instead because it
only costs a little more? This strategy is used to prod customers to
purchase (and spend) more than they may have otherwise.

# Psychological Pricing (Odd/Even Pricing) {#sect-00005}

One popular form of psychological pricing is odd-even pricing. Similar
to price appearance discussed earlier in this chapter, odd-even pricing
banks on human motivation to lure in customers. The "odd" in this
pricing tactic refers to the odd number at the end of a price, such as
\$19.95. Psychologically, the odd number in the price equates to value;
the product is not \$20.00, it is still in the "teens" at \$19.95.
Conversely, the "even" in the tactic utilizes even numbers at the end of
the price, often zero, as in \$50.00. This pricing tactic leads buyers
to believe that the product is of higher quality because it is a nice,
even number. Luxury items are often priced using the "even" side of
odd-even pricing.

Ever wonder how odd-even pricing got its start? Decades ago, retailers
began using this pricing strategy not to lure customers but rather to
force cashiers to open their cash register drawers to make change---and
thus record the sale. Over time, consumer psychologists studied the
impact of odd-even pricing on consumption and found it to work!

# Economy Pricing {#sect-00006}

When you are grocery shopping, are you surprised to see that name-brand
products are priced much higher than store brands even though the
product is essentially the same? Does the name brand really cost that
much more to produce? Well, yes and no. Brand-name items spend
considerably more on advertising than store brands. In order to recoup
those costs (and based on the fact that name brands have a higher value
perception to buyers), companies set prices higher for name brands.
Economy pricing, on the other hand, is a tactic in which store brand
prices are set much lower than their name-brand competitors. The focus
on these products is selling in high volume by lowering prices and
minimizing advertising costs.

Another example of economy pricing is used in the airline industry.
Allegiant Air strives to offer no-frills air travel that is priced
considerably lower than its competitors. But you have to get your seats
fast at the lowest prices because the price increases as seats fill up.
Oh, and if you want to travel with any luggage, you'll need to pay
extra; Allegiant charges for any luggage other than one personal item.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00007}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# 

bundle pricing

pricing strategy that promotes purchasing multiple items at once; used
to prod customers to purchase (and spend) more than they may have
otherwise

economy pricing

setting a price much lower than competitors to sell high volumes of a
product

odd-even pricing

psychological pricing strategy that uses prices that end with odd or
even numbers to attract customers

product line pricing

setting a higher price for some product lines and lower price points for
others in order to capture various target markets
