m00081

0c01734d-b1bb-411e-a9d9-76144921cdbb

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify ethical issues related to the pricing of products and services.

Describe the different types of unethical practices.

# Price Fixing {#sect-00002}

Recall that *ethics* is defined as behaviors based on values and beliefs
of right and wrong. In marketing, unethical behavior can have
catastrophic consequences. If a customer's trust is broken with a
product, their likelihood of continuing to do business with that company
dramatically decreases. Companies practicing unethical behavior run the
risk of not only losing customers and profits, but also facing legal
consequences. Let's explore some unethical (illegal) practices as they
relate to pricing.

Price fixing occurs when two or more competitors agree to set prices at
a specific level. The practice of price fixing force customers to pay
higher prices than normal with no substitute alternatives. Consumers who
purchased or leased certain automobiles were part of a class-action
lawsuit involving several automobile manufactures. The brands, including
Audi, BMW, Buick, Chevrolet, and many others agreed to pay into the
settlement after being accused of conspiring together to artificially
inflate the prices of various auto parts.

# Deceptive/Illegal Price Advertising {#sect-00003}

Deceptive price advertising is an unethical pricing practice in which
the advertised price of a product is misleading to consumers. For
example, let's assume a company advertised a product with a "suggested
retail price" of \$9.99 but is offering the same product for the "low
price of only \$4.99." If the same product is actually priced in a
market in the same country for \$9.99, it is not considered deceptive.
However, if the product is not priced at \$9.99 in any other market, it
is considered deceptive.

Say you sell hats for a price of \$29.99, but sales are sluggish. You
decided to offer your hats "buy one get one free," but just before the
sale starts, you raise the price of one hat to \$59.99. Is this
deceptive price advertising? Yes. This is not a bargain for consumers
and is considered deceptive according to the Federal Trade Commission
(FTC).

# Predatory Pricing {#sect-00004}

Another unethical (and usually illegal) pricing strategy is that of
predatory pricing. Predatory pricing occurs when a company prices goods
or services so low that other companies cannot compete. Predatory
pricing often entails a company selling products below its cost with the
intent of driving out competition and creating a monopoly situation.
Once competition is eliminated, the company will often increase the
prices exponentially---not only to recuperate losses from the lower
prices, but also to make more profit. Under various antitrust laws, this
practice is illegal when it seeks to drive out competition and makes a
market susceptible to monopolies. In 2000, Walmart was accused by the
Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade, and Consumer Protection of
predatory pricing practices. The complaint stated that the company was
selling staple goods such as butter and milk below cost with a goal to
drive out competition and create a monopoly. In short, predatory pricing
undermines the free market where supply and demand sets prices.

# Price Discrimination {#sect-00005}

Price discrimination is a pricing strategy that charges different prices
to customers based on what the seller believes it can get the customer
to agree to. This pricing strategy is not illegal so long as it does not
cause specific economic harm. But marketers should be wary of using this
price tactic, as it could lead to disloyal customers if they feel they
are not getting the best price.

# Monopoly Gouging {#sect-00006}

Monopoly gouging is when a seller increases the prices of goods and
services that are not considered fair or competitive. If there are no or
very few substitutes, a company may be enticed to force buyers to pay a
much higher price, leaving them no options. When there are very few
competitors in a market, such as utilities, the industry is highly
regulated by the government. For example, your electric company cannot
choose to randomly increase prices to increase profits; it must follow a
regulated process when increasing prices.

During the winter of 2020--2021, Texas experienced much colder and
snowier conditions than usual. Millions were left without power, and
dozens lost their lives. As hotels began to fill up, prices skyrocketed.
A Super 8 motel was shown on Hotels.com at nearly \$400/night,
exponentially higher than in ordinary times. Identifying price gouging
is a bit more complicated than it seems. While basic economics would
expect higher demand to equal higher prices, the practice of price
gouging is not only unethical but also illegal in many states when a
disaster is announced.

:::: {#note-00005 .note}
::: title
Warby Parker
:::

Warby Parker sought to find a solution to the problem of expensive
eyeglasses---a medical necessity for many people. The company stated
that "the eyewear industry \[was\] dominated by a single company that
has been able to keep prices artificially high while reaping huge
profits from consumer who have no other options." Warby Parker set out
to change the way in which glasses were offered to consumers. The
company's direct-to-consumer approach and a uniform pricing strategy
have made waves in the eyewear industry.

All of Warby Parker's eyeglasses are not only priced lower than its
competitors, but all of its eyeglasses are priced the same: \$95. The
average cost of eyewear was \$263, making it difficult for some
consumers to afford the needed glasses and making it difficult for
people to distinguish the value between a \$200 pair of glasses and a
\$400 pair of glasses.

The company bypassed traditional supply chains and began making glasses
in-house. It also talked directly to customers to understand the needs
of the market and, in turn, is able to offer prescription eyeglasses at
a fraction of the cost. In addition, it saw a global problem: too many
people need glasses but cannot afford them. That's why the company
donates one pair of glasses for every pair sold.
::::

#  {#sect-00007}

In this chapter, we explored the process of setting pricing for products
and services and the importance of pricing to the profitability of a
business. We defined fixed and variable costs and how they factor into
the break-even equation in initial pricing decisions. Commonly used
pricing objectives were defined as cost based, sales oriented, market
share, and target return. These objectives are used to set a clear
pricing strategy for both products and services.

The new-product pricing strategies of price skimming and penetration
pricing were defined, explaining common practices used based on the
product type and placement in the market. The psychology of pricing
based on consumer buying habits was identified and defined. Techniques
include odd-even pricing, prestige pricing, and artificial time
constraints.

The final concept we covered was ethics in pricing and how the consumer
can identify unethical and/or illegal pricing practices. Price fixing,
deceptive/illegal pricing in advertising, price discrimination, and
monopoly/price gouging were discussed as practices that are used in an
effort to increase profits.

#  {#sect-00008}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00009}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00010}

One of the most important tasks you have in establishing your personal
brand is how you are going to communicate your skill level and
experience to others. Let's start by developing a 30-second elevator
pitch about yourself. An elevator pitch is what you would say about
yourself if you were in an elevator with someone and only had the time
between floors to share your message. What is the most important thing
you would want to share about yourself and your personal brand if you
were in an elevator with a hiring manager at company you want to work
for? Things to consider covering include a quick introduction, your
unique value or skill that would want to make them hire you, and
something engaging about yourself to help them remember you.

#  {#sect-00011}

Using LinkedIn, find a pricing analyst. Reach out to them, introduce
yourself, and let them know that you're a student wanting to know more
about their job role. Then schedule an interview. Questions you may want
to ask include:

What is your background and education, and what brought you to this job?

What do you feel are the pros and cons of this job role?

Share with me what a typical day, week, and year look like in this job
role.

How has COVID-19 impacted your work?

What advice do you have for someone interested in pursuing this job?

#  {#sect-00012}

Complete the following information about the company and
products/services you chose to focus on as you develop the marketing
plan throughout the course. You may need to conduct research in order to
obtain necessary information.

Instructions: Using the Marketing Plan Template file you created from
the [Marketing and Customer Value](#) assignment and expanded upon in
[Strategic Planning in Marketing](#), [Market Segmentation, Targeting,
and Positioning](#), [Marketing Research and Market Intelligence](#),
and [Products: Consumer Offerings](#), complete the following section of
your marketing plan:

Marketing Strategy: Pricing

Submit the marketing plan to your instructor for grading and feedback.

#  {#sect-00013}

## Naked Wines {#sect-00014}

Buying a good bottle of wine can be hit or miss. A consumer can pay a
lot and not enjoy the wine or pay a little and really love the wine. As
with any product, there are fixed costs and variable costs included in
the price of a bottle of wine. Some of those expenses include the costs
of production, the raw materials including grapes, barrels, bottles,
utilities, and labor. Other costs include administrative overhead,
sales, and marketing costs.

Of course, distribution must be factored into the price of a bottle of
wine. With an indirect distribution channel, wine often passes from the
winemaker to a distributor, a wholesaler, and then a retailer.
Macroenvironmental factors such as nature can affect pricing by
affecting the grape supply, which will also add to the overall cost.

In addition to the obvious cost factors, there are psychological factors
such as branding, exclusivity, and rating points. Wine rating points are
awarded to wines based on input from industry experts and wine critics.
Bottles with higher ratings points can generally command a higher price.
In addition, a bottle with greater notoriety and awards will also be
able to sell for significantly more than more obscure wines or those
just starting out.

Breaking into the wine-making business can be incredibly challenging.
All business start-ups face steep hurdles in the beginning stages. Wine
making may well have more sunk costs than a typical start-up. With
grapes taking years to grow and reach their peak and the labor for
harvesting, juicing, and fermenting, entering the wine-making business
can quickly burn through start-up cash.

Getting money from a bank to start a business means business plans,
initial investment, proven experience, and endless paperwork that takes
up valuable time that could be spent tending the grapes. And making a
name for yourself in the wine industry can take years. How do you get
consumers to choose and buy your wine from the thousands of labels
available?

[Enter Naked Wines](#). The company was founded as a way to help small,
independent winemakers break into the wine business. Started in 2008,
Naked Wines had a mission to give consumers great wines at significantly
reduced prices and help winemakers get the funding needed to start their
business.

Naked Wines thought it could break into the wine business by allowing
consumers to join as investors. When a customer buys from Naked Wines,
they become an investor. Each month investors purchase wine at a reduced
cost from Naked Wines, which in turn invests in the winemakers it
represents.

While the pricing is an advantage, being invested in the winemakers is a
bigger advantage. Each month, investors get to choose which wines are
delivered to them. The wines are carefully curated based on their wine
preference profile along with the ratings they provide to the winemakers
on previous purchases.

The Naked Wines business model allows the winemakers to have access to
funding and market research, while the investors have access to great
wines. As Naked Wines continues to grow from an initial start in the
United Kingdom to operations in the United States, it continues to add
winemakers and investors. Small winemakers who would otherwise not have
had an opportunity to grow their business have found success and
community through Naked Wines.

## Case Questions {#sect-00015}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00016}

:::: {#rf-034 .note}
::: title
:::

34\.

"Auto Parts Price-Fixing 4th Round Class Action Settlement," Top Class
Actions, October 16, 2019,
https://topclassactions.com/lawsuit-settlements/closed-settlements/926433-auto-parts-price-fixing-4th-round-class-action-settlement/.
::::

:::: {#rf-035 .note}
::: title
:::

35\.

Will Kenton, "Predatory Pricing," Investopedia, Dotdash Meredith,
updated January 30, 2022,
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/predatory-pricing.asp.
::::

:::: {#rf-036 .note}
::: title
:::

36\.

Stacy Mitchell, "Wal-Mart Charged with Predatory Pricing," Institute for
Local Self-Reliance, November 1, 2000,
https://ilsr.org/walmart-charged-predatory-pricing/.
::::

:::: {#rf-037 .note}
::: title
:::

37\.

Natalie B. Compton, "Texas Hotel Prices Skyrocketed after Power Outages.
Here's What to Know about Price Gouging,"

Washington Post

, February 17, 2021,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/travel/tips/texas-hotel-storm-price-gouging/.
::::

:::: {#rf-038 .note}
::: title
:::

38\.

"History," Warby Parker, accessed May 30, 2022,
https://www.warbyparker.com/history.
::::

:::: {#rf-039 .note}
::: title
:::

39\.

Knowledge@Wharton, "The Consumer Psychology behind Warby Parker's \$95
Pricing for Eyeglasses,"

Time

, May 23, 2013,
https://business.time.com/2013/05/23/the-consumer-psychology-behind-warby-parkers-95-pricing-for-eyeglasses/.
::::

:::: {#rf-040 .note}
::: title
:::

40\.

"10 Tips for Getting into the Wine Business," Napa Valley Wine Academy,
https://napavalleywineacademy.com/10-tips-for-getting-into-the-wine-business/
::::

:::: {#rf-041 .note}
::: title
:::

41\.

Kerana Todorov, "Farming for Labor Day: Winemakers Discuss the
Challenging 2022 Harvest," Wine Business, September 23, 2022,
https://www.winebusiness.com/news/article/262997
::::

:::: {#rf-042 .note}
::: title
:::

42\.

https://us.nakedwines.com/content/about/about-us
::::

# 

deceptive price advertising

an unethical pricing practice in which the advertised price of a product
is misleading to consumers

monopoly gouging

when a seller increases the prices of goods and services that are not
considered fair or competitive

predatory pricing

when a company prices goods or services so low that other companies
cannot compete

price discrimination

selling goods and services at different prices to different customers

price fixing

two or more companies agreeing to set certain prices in the market
