m00053

f77ae466-8ee0-4827-90a4-66c5e83587ac

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Peloton, producer of high-end home fitness equipment and streaming
fitness classes, has taken advantage of the tech boom to bundle its
products and service for a recurring revenue source. Peloton is known
for its expensive at-home fitness bikes and treadmills aimed at a
high-end target audience. Once a customer purchases a bike for
\$1,500--\$2,600 and/or a treadmill for \$3,500, most fitness companies
would not expect additional revenue from a customer for several years.

But Peloton sees itself as a technology company that facilitates
service. Peloton CEO John Foley has said that "we see ourself more akin
to an Apple, a Tesla, or a Nest or a GoPro---where it's a consumer
product that has a foundation of sexy hardware technology and sexy
software technology." In the case of Peloton, that sexy software
technology comes in the form of streaming workout classes including
cycling, strength, boot camp, yoga, and meditation taught by charismatic
instructors who have become social media influencers. The price tag for
Peloton customers is a recurring \$39 monthly fee for all access on top
of the cost of the product.

Peloton customers are purchasing more than a one-time durable good.
Instead, they are buying a networked effect in which they are connected
to fitness instructors and one another. Hailed the new form of
competitive advantage, networked effects bring customers closer to the
brand through personal connections between the brand and customers and
between customers. Once a customer is a loyal part of the network, the
cost to switch brands in terms of habit and lifestyle is high. As a
result, loyal customers are less likely to brand switch and are less
price sensitive.

While product bundling isn't a new concept---think about a value meal at
a restaurant that includes a sandwich, fries, and a beverage---the
product-service bundle is an emerging trend among technology companies.
It provides recurring revenue for the brand while bringing the customer
into a more intimate customer experience, leading to brand loyalty.
Typically, the service fees ultimately provide more revenue per customer
than the one-time product purchase in this model. The recurring revenue
model makes the product facilitate the service exchange, blurring the
traditional product-service lines.

What examples come to mind when you think of product-service bundles? Do
you have a prediction for how this trend may shape product development
in the future?

# References {#sect-00001}

:::: {#rf-001 .note}
::: title
:::

1\.

"Compare Bikes: Which One Is Right for You?," Peloton, accessed February
1, 2022, https://www.onepeloton.com/bikes/compare; "Tread Specs: Take a
Closer Look," Peloton, accessed February 1, 2022,
https://www.onepeloton.com/tread/specs.
::::

:::: {#rf-002 .note}
::: title
:::

2\.

Marco Iansiti and Karim R. Lakhani,

Competing in the Age of AI: Strategy and Leadership When Algorithms and
Networks Run the World

(Boston: Harvard Business Review Press, 2020).
::::
