m00054

44f6ba7a-48f9-4b87-a68b-51fde9009dbb

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Differentiate between products, services, and experiences.

Describe how consumer and business/industrial products are classified.

Identify the four levels of a product.

# Products and Services Defined {#sect-00002}

When a customer makes a purchase, they expect value from that exchange.
Think about what you ate for breakfast today. You paid money to receive
a product that satisfied your hunger. Is that all the value you
received? Perhaps not. If you ate eggs, bacon, and coffee at a
restaurant, you had both a product and a service experience. Maybe
someone at the restaurant handed you a menu, took your order, brought
your food, refilled your coffee, cleaned up dishes, and collected
payment for your meal. The eggs, bacon, and coffee were the product,
while the acts of the restaurant staff were a service. And the summation
of it all was the product--service experience.

Products are tangible items that are part of an exchange between a buyer
and seller. Products can be seen, touched, owned, and stored. For
example, the computer or tablet you're using to read this textbook is a
product. You may have visited a store to see and touch the product
before purchasing to ensure it met your needs. Post-purchase, the
computer or tablet is yours to own and store for later use as you
please. The tangible nature of the product allows the consumer to
possess it.

Services are intangible solutions that are also an exchange between
buyer and seller. Unlike products, services cannot be touched, owned, or
stored for later use. For example, a college course on marketing is a
service. Students cannot own the course; they cannot store it for later,
nor will they have a tangible object representing the course. Another
defining feature of a service is the customer is typically a part of the
service experience. Imagine buying tickets to your favorite band in
concert. You will have to attend the concert to realize the full benefit
of the service experience.

While a computer is a true product and a marketing class is a true
service, many exchanges between buyer and seller fall somewhere in the
middle of the product--service continuum (see [\#](#)). Think back to
the restaurant breakfast at the top of this section; restaurants are a
prime example of an exchange that includes products and services.
Marketers are typically working with an offering that falls on the
product--service continuum. This means that they need to understand how
to influence consumer behavior in the search for products and services.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# Customer Experience {#sect-00003}

Customer experience (CX) is the overarching impression that customers
have of a brand. Therefore, each touchpoint with a product or service
becomes a part of the customer experience. A strong customer experience
integrates technology, marketing, sales, and customer service to deliver
a strong brand perception.

For example, if you have ever visited an Apple Store, you probably have
experienced one of the most lauded customer experiences there is. From
the moment you walk in, you are surrounded by products and transported
into a world of technology. Each touchpoint, from the check-in on an
iPad to the latest products that are available for use, reinforces the
brand through customer experience. Brands with strong customer
experience tend to have more loyal customers who become brand advocates.

:::::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
Netflix
:::

Netflix has perfected the customer experience (see [\#](#)). Using
technology as a driver, Netflix predicts its customers' viewing
preferences using an algorithm, removing friction from the user
experience and making the brand an essential part of its customers'
lives. Netflix's use of personalization is common among companies that
excel in customer experience. The customer is at the center of the
experience that is entirely tailored to them.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

Once users enter the Netflix website, they see an experience that makes
their viewing opportunity seamless and flexible. Netflix lets the user
know right away that it streams thousands of movies and television shows
on various devices. The sign-up involves three easy steps, and then the
customer is brought into a viewing world built around them.

The Netflix algorithm analyzes viewing habits based on a variety of
factors, including:

Viewing history

Genre or category

Time of day watched

How long the user watched

Devices currently streaming

Rating history for similar content

Other Netflix users with similar preferences on the platform

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

As the algorithm learns more about the viewer, the customer experience
improves, becoming essential to customers' lives and building brand
loyalty.
::::::

# Classifications of Consumer and Business Products {#sect-00004}

Product managers classify products first by whether they are consumer
products or industrial products. This classification is essential
because businesses typically make product purchase decisions to create a
consumer good. Meanwhile, consumers are buying products for their
personal use. Therefore, this distinction impacts how product managers
design, market, and sell products.

Consumer products are classified into four main categories (see
[\#](#)):

Convenience products

are products that consumers can purchase easily, quickly, and without a
lot of thoughtful decision-making. Convenience product purchases may be
habitual in that the consumer buys the same brand each time. In
addition, they are typically lower-priced and have wide distribution, so
they are easily accessible to consumers. Frozen waffles, bar soap, milk,
and bathroom cleaners are examples of convenience products.

Shopping products

require more thought from the consumer. Consumers may research and shop
around for shopping products, seeking the best quality or price.
Shopping products are typically available at a few retail stores and
online, and they may be priced higher than convenience products.
Exercise equipment, technology, clothing, and airline tickets are
shopping products.

Specialty products

have unique qualities that consumers will make an extra effort to seek
out. The product's unique nature typically means that the consumer will
not comparison shop and will spend a significant amount of time and
money to procure the product. Luxury cars, rare breeds of saltwater
fish, fine art, and jewelry are examples of specialty products.

Unsought products

are consumer goods that a buyer doesn't anticipate purchasing. As a
result, the consumer is often not aware of the product or does not think
it is needed. A flat tire that needs repairing, a roof damaged in a
storm that needs to be replaced, and funeral services are examples of
unsought products.

  *Type of Product*   *Price*    *Consumer Decision-Making Process*                                                                                                           *Distribution*
  ------------------- ---------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Convenience         Low        This is a habitual/automatic purchase process that involves little comparison shopping.                                                      Widespread distribution at several retail outlets
  Shopping            Low-Mid    There is time spent on the consumer decision-making process and comparison shopping for price and quality.                                   Selective distribution at retail outlets that match customer and brand type
  Specialty           High       Having a specific brand or product in mind means little comparison shopping. Typically, this is a special purchase with a lot of planning.   Exclusive distribution at one or a select few retail outlets
  Unsought            Variable   The consumer is unaware or uninterested, so they exert little thought or comparison shopping.                                                Variable distribution depends on the product

  : Types of Products {#table-00001}

# Classifications of Business and Industrial Products {#sect-00005}

Businesses purchase products to aid in manufacturing or creating
consumer products or services. For example, if you have ever been to a
doughnut shop, you might think about how the bakers produce a doughnut.
The bakers have probably purchased baking equipment, ingredients for the
doughnuts, boxes to package the doughnuts, and a service to make
deliveries. Business and industrial products are classified as follows:

Raw materials

are the products that a business needs to purchase in order to make a
consumer good, such as flour, sugar, and yeast in our doughnut example.

Manufactured materials and parts

are products used to create the product. For example, large baking
sheets are manufactured materials specific to a bakery and purchased to
enable product creation.

Capital items

are assets that are valuable to the business and have tangible value.
For example, our bakery's large ovens would be considered a capital
item.

Supplies and services

are goods and services that are typically disposed of and do not contain
a tangible value. For example, the bakery's boxes are part of its
supplies to package doughnuts.

# The Three Levels of Product {#sect-00006}

In marketing, we often say that consumers do not make rational
decisions---this consumer decision-making process ties directly to how
we think about products. Therefore, product marketers should ask
themselves, "What's the problem the consumer is trying to solve?" The
answer to this question gets to the root of the core product. The core
product is what your customer is actually buying: convenience, ego,
ease, flexibility, etc. For example, if you have ever purchased
single-use plastic water bottles, you were likely purchasing a core
product of convenience.

The second level of a product is the actual product: a toaster, a
waffle, or a sports car, for example. The actual product includes the
product features, brand, level of quality, packaging, and design.

The third level of a product is the augmented product: warranties,
customer service, product support, etc. The augmented product is the
unseen aspects of the product essential to its service to you. For
example, Butterball launches a turkey talk-line that provides tips on
cooking the perfect Thanksgiving turkey each Thanksgiving. So if you
have turkey roasting questions, the talk-line is ready and waiting to
answer your questions in this augmented product. A hotel might provide
concierge services to obtain tickets to events or limousine service, dry
cleaning services, recommendations for local restaurants, etc. All of
these would be augmented services. (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
Product Marketer
:::

A product marketer, also sometimes known as a product marketing manager,
promotes a product and its features to a target market. Learn more about
this [job role through this article from HubSpot](#), including a job
description, necessary qualifications, and job responsibilities. Also,
check out this video from a Google employee about being a product
marketer.

[Product Marketing 101 with Google Product Marketing Manager](#)

If this job interests you, [check out this article from Indeed](#) that
outlines more details, including the typical salary, necessary skills,
and education requirements. Or refer to this [guide on how to take the
next step and get a job in product marketing](#).

Lastly, to start preparing for a job in this role, check out this mock
interview for the product marketing manager role.

[Product Marketing Manager (PMM) Mock Interview](#)
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00007}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# References {#sect-00008}

:::: {#rf-003 .note}
::: title
:::

3\.

Erica Schneider, "How Netflix Creates Immersive Experiences with
Exceptional Design and UX,"

All Things Data-Driven Marketing

(blog), CXL, August 27, 2021, https://cxl.com/blog/netflix-design/.
::::

# 

actual product

product available for purchase

augmented product

product having unseen aspects essential to customers

capital items

assets valuable to a business that also have tangible value

convenience products

products that consumers can purchase easily, quickly, and without a lot
of thoughtful decision-making

core product

product solution that the customer is actually buying: convenience, ego,
ease, flexibility, etc.

customer experience

the overarching impression that customers have of a brand

manufactured materials and parts

products used to create a product

products

tangible items that are part of an exchange between a buyer and a seller

raw materials

products that a business needs to purchase in order to make a consumer
good

services

intangible solutions that are an exchange between buyer and seller

shopping products

products that require more thought from the consumer as they seek the
best quality or price

specialty products

products that have unique qualities that consumers will make an extra
effort to seek out

supplies and services

goods and services that are typically disposed of and do not contain a
tangible value

unsought products

consumer goods that a buyer doesn't anticipate purchasing
