m00055

3242ac4f-2025-493d-9d49-088388b26a85

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define product items, product lines, and product mixes.

Describe product line length and depth.

Discuss product line filling and product line stretching.

# Product Line Length and Depth {#sect-00002}

Companies typically sell many products, some of which are singular and
some of which are part of a larger category of offerings. So let's start
with a product item, a particular good that a company sells. For
example, Domino's Pizza sells its original hand-tossed pizza as a
product item on its menu.

A company will also sell a product item as a part of a broader product
line. A product line is a set of products that are similar or
complementary. For example, Domino's sells crunchy thin, handmade pan,
Brooklyn style, and gluten-free crust along with its hand-tossed pizza
crust as a part of a product line.

A product mix contains all the products that a company sells. In
addition to pizza, Domino's sells salads, sandwiches, appetizers, pasta,
desserts, and beverages. These products make up the product mix for
Domino's ([\#](#)).

There are benefits to brands in organizing into product lines and mixes.
For example, if you have ever added a chocolate lava cake to your
Domino's order, you know firsthand that products within a mix are easily
cross-sold. You may have also seen a commercial where Domino's promotes
its product mix, creating efficiencies in its media advertising spend.
In addition, breadth of products provides some assurance that
competitors will not compete in the same space. Finally, you may have
noticed that some appetizers and desserts are packaged in the same box,
creating supply efficiencies.

On the flip side, if product offerings are too similar, they may
cannibalize (or steal from) the original product, resulting in lower
profitability. For example, if Domino's had 30 types of pizzas, the
stores might have to stock extra ingredients to make those pizzas, but
Domino's might not sell more pizzas as a whole because the product line
offerings are too similar.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# Product Line Depth and Product Mix Width {#sect-00003}

Product line depth refers to the number of products in the line. Using
our previous example, Domino's carries five products in the pizza
product line. Meanwhile, the product mix width refers to the number of
product lines a brand carries. Domino's offers seven product lines
within its product mix (pizza, salads, sandwiches, appetizers, pasta,
desserts, and beverages).

The product line depth and product mix width allow a company to
diversify its offerings to maximize customer loyalty and mitigate risk.
For example, if a customer enjoys Domino's Pizza, they may extend their
order to include one of the other offerings in the product mix. On the
flip side, if a customer has a bad experience with the pizza, they might
try chicken or pasta instead next time. However, it is essential to note
that too many offerings can cannibalize one another and drive up the
cost of goods sold because of the variations that each product requires.

# Product Line Filling and Product Line Stretching {#sect-00004}

One of the reasons for an ample product line is to leave no room for
competitors to solve a customer's need. Companies use a product line
filling strategy when they add products to the product line to ensure
that competitors do not enter their market. If you wonder why Domino's
has so many pizza toppings, consider that it might be product line
filling at work.

On the other hand, it might make more sense for a company to add product
lines. The addition of product lines is a practice called product line
stretching. There are three main ways to stretch a product line:

Stretching Downward.

A brand introduces a product line that is less expensive than its
current offering. This may open a new target market or change a brand's
positioning in a competitive market. However, it is essential to
consider whether stretching down might shift the brand's perception or
take share from other product lines.

Tesla

introduced its Model 3 following its more expensive Model S, following
the stretching downward strategy.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Stretching Upward.

A brand introduces a product line that is more expensive than its
current offering. This may increase profitability or reposition the
brand. First, however, it is essential to determine whether the brand
has equity in the upward market.

Godiva

introduced its gold collection to stretch its product line upward.

Stretching Up and Down.

A brand can stretch up and down simultaneously. While this has the
potential for great rewards, it also introduces a fair amount of risk.

Dell

utilizes a strategy to stretch up and down with its everyday access
laptops, creator laptops, and all the way up to its immersive gaming
laptops.

Suppose Domino's wanted to join the wood-fired pizza trend. It could
employ an upward product line stretching strategy to introduce Domino's
to a more upscale market that appreciates wood-fired pizza.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00005}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# References {#sect-00006}

:::: {#rf-004 .note}
::: title
:::

4\.

John A. Davis,

Competitive Success: How Branding Adds Value

(Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2010), 76.
::::

# 

product item

a particular good that a company sells

product line

a set of products that are similar or complementary

product line depth

the number of products in a line

product line filling

products added to a product line to keep competitors from entering the
market

product line stretching

addition of product lines

product mix

all the products a company sells

product mix width

the number of product lines a brand carries
