m00056

c7f57a97-b06f-483f-8136-4bdc06994676

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define the product life cycle.

List and describe the stages of the product life cycle.

# The Product Life Cycle {#sect-00002}

Have you ever wondered what happens after a new product launch? Is the
product successful right away, or does it need a little help from
marketing to realize its potential? Then, as the product matures, does
it stay on the shelf, or does it have a natural endpoint? The product
life cycle (see [\#](#)) maps the stages a product goes through,
tracking its sales and profitability.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# The Product Life Cycle Stages {#sect-00003}

The product life cycle begins in the introduction stage. This is when
consumer awareness is building and sales are starting to grow. The
marketing investment is high as brands invest heavily in advertising and
sales promotion to encourage trial. Profitability is low due to costs to
launch and scale a new product. What products can you think of that are
in the introduction stage of the product life cycle?

Once a product catches on in the marketplace, it enters the growth stage
of the product life cycle. The growth stage is characterized by
increasing sales and the potential for copycat brands to enter the
market once they see revenue and profitability. In addition, products
require less marketing and distribution investments during the growth
stage, making them more profitable. However, a brand can decide to
invest in product improvements and distribution, which may decrease
profitability in the short term in exchange for long-term gain. When
hoverboards were new to the market, they experienced explosive growth
that quickly tapered off.

The product enters the maturity stage when sales growth slows and
profitability levels taper off. The maturity stage is typically the
longest stage of the product life cycle, with products remaining in this
stage for years or even decades. Profitability may remain if the brand
has a solid competitive advantage or decline if too many competitors
enter the market. Marketing investment can increase at this stage if the
brand has a rival, and product modification can alter the product to
meet consumers' needs. Yet often a brand will retain a low level of
marketing during the maturity stage to remind consumers of its benefits.
Kraft Macaroni & Cheese is an example of a product that has a solid
place in the market and has stabilized as a mature product.

Eventually, most products enter the decline stage. The decline stage is
characterized by a significant decrease in sales and profitability.
Sometimes the decline occurs because the market has changed: technology
has evolved, consumer tastes have shifted, or the need that the product
satisfies is no longer relevant. Other times, the product is pushed out
by rising costs or competitors. Many companies report their earnings
quarterly and do not want to keep an unprofitable brand in their
portfolio. As a result, companies typically try to divest a product in
the decline stage. Another company may pick up the brand, invest in it,
and bring the product back to a growth or maturity stage. Apple's iPod
entered the decline stage when the popular iPhone was introduced,
bringing a host of features plus music.

It is important to note that products do not always travel through the
product life cycle at a linear rate, nor do they all travel through all
product life cycle stages. For example, a product can be introduced and
never gain traction, so it goes directly from introduction to decline.
Or a product might gain popularity rapidly during the growth stage and
then meet a quick decline. This phenomenon occurs when products are
fads.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00004}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# 

decline stage

part of the product life cycle characterized by a significant decrease
in sales and profitability

growth stage

part of the product life cycle characterized by increasing sales; stage
when copycat brands may enter the market

introduction stage

part of the product life cycle when consumer awareness is building and
sales are starting to grow

maturity stage

part of the product life cycle when sales growth slows and profitability
levels off

product life cycle

the stages a product goes through, tracking its sales and profitability
