m00057

7fd5f358-ffd3-489a-bd87-c646a85d3975

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Discuss marketing strategies in the introduction stage of the product
life cycle.

Classify marketing strategies used in the growth stage of the product
life cycle.

Characterize marketing strategies used in the maturity stage of the
product life cycle.

Identify marketing strategies used in the decline stage of the product
life cycle.

# Marketing Strategies in the Introduction Stage {#sect-00002}

The introduction stage is characterized by awareness-building to
encourage trial. There is a significant investment in marketing
activities at this stage to make the shift from early adopters to a
broader audience, and pricing is a means of enticing trial.

A rapid skimming strategy sets a high price along with extensive
advertising and sales promotion to establish the product in the
marketplace. This strategy allows a product to gain share quickly and
fend off potential competitors. Technology innovations typically use a
rapid skimming strategy to attract early adopters who are willing to pay
a higher price.

In contrast, a slow skimming strategy may be utilized when there is not
an anticipated influx of competitors. The slow skimming strategy sets
high prices with low advertising and sales promotion investment. For
example, we may see a rapid skimming strategy for the new model of a
truck or SUV in the automobile market because competition is high and
the barrier to entry is low. On the other hand, the Tesla brand used a
slow skimming strategy in its initial launch with a high-priced offering
making it exclusive.

A rapid penetration pricing strategy is appropriate when volume sales
will increase market share quickly, and a lower-priced strategy is
employed. Rapid penetration pricing strategies encourage customers to
try a product and switch to a new brand. This strategy works well with
product categories with many competitors and price-sensitive customers.
For example, Old Navy used a rapid penetration pricing strategy when it
opened its stores in 1994 with an \$8 jeans promotion under the
assumption that if customers tried its jeans, they would be hooked and
become brand advocates.

In contrast, a slow penetration pricing strategy establishes low prices
and low promotion to capture share more slowly in a market that
typically does not readily react to promotion. Products that do not have
a lot of brand equity and are necessities do not respond to promotion
readily and are appropriate for a slow penetration pricing strategy. For
example, if a store brand of butter were to establish an everyday low
price without the use of promotion, it would be adopting a slow
penetration pricing strategy.

# Marketing Strategies in the Growth Stage {#sect-00003}

The growth stage is characterized by growing sales and increasing
competition in the marketplace. Investment in product and place is
essential at the growth stage to maximize market share and scale
quickly.

Brands may improve product quality or add new features in the growth
stage based on early lessons from the introduction stage and to fend off
competitors. Products with a first-mover advantage may find competitors
who replicate their products entering the market, so product improvement
is essential. For example, OXO is a brand that uses universal design to
innovate products to make them easier to use. This continuous product
improvement makes it a leader in the kitchenware market.

Once a product becomes mainstream in the growth stage, expanding
distribution channels can increase market share. While expanded
distribution adds expense, it also brings the product to more customers
in various settings. For example, Chicago-based Home Run Inn Pizza was
so famous in the restaurant format that it expanded to grocery stores to
increase share.

Finally, brands use promotion to shift their message from awareness to
preference. The shift from a niche market to a mass market typically
involves an advertising investment. In 2021, TikTok moved from awareness
to preference, and its promotion followed suit, reminding users why they
enjoy using the platform.

# Marketing Strategies in the Maturity Stage {#sect-00004}

Stability characterizes the maturity stage: profits, customers, and
pricing. While this sounds like good news, brands must defend their
market share from increasing product replication and product innovation
from competitors.

Products in the maturity stage may engage in market modification, an
extension of the product to new customers. For example, Cheerios adopted
a market modification strategy when it positioned its cereal to the
aging baby boomer demographic as a heart-healthy breakfast. This
strategy opened a new market for Cheerios to increase its market share.

Products in the maturity stage may also engage in product modification,
altering products to fit the market. Modifications may be made to the
function of the product, the quality of the product, and/or the style of
the product. For example, Chobani modified its yogurt product in 2015 by
altering the container, allowing the customer to flip toppings into
yogurt, and changing the functionality of the yogurt and topping
product.

# Marketing Strategies in the Decline Stage {#sect-00005}

The decline stage of the product life cycle is characterized by
declining sales and profitability. The product is at the end of its life
cycle and is no longer sustainable or a good investment. Brands reduce
to a core set of activities and set out to divest the brand asset.

A brand might divest a product to protect the rest of its portfolio,
either by selling the brand or discontinuing it. For example, the
Coca-Cola brand divested New Coke in 2002 after 17 years on the market
in various forms. The product was taken off the shelves because it was
unsuccessful in the marketplace.

A brand might also choose to harvest an unsuccessful product. Harvesting
involves reducing all unnecessary expenses to retain any remaining
revenue. In addition, harvesting allows the brand to invest cash in its
more profitable products. Typically, products do not reemerge after
harvesting and more often are divested over time. Technology products,
such as smartphones, are often harvested as their up-to-date
replacements hit the market. Refurbished products may be sold at a
discount or used for parts for new models.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00006}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# References {#sect-00007}

:::: {#rf-005 .note}
::: title
:::

5\.

Roberto A. Ferdman, "Goodbye, Good Old Greek Yogurt,"

Washington Post

, December 18, 2015,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2015/12/18/goodbye-good-old-greek-yogurt/.
::::

:::: {#rf-006 .note}
::: title
:::

6\.

Kieran Fogarty et al., "New Coke,"

Encyclopaedia Britannica

, August 13, 2018, https://www.britannica.com/topic/New-Coke.
::::

# 

divest

to sell a brand or discontinue a product to protect a portfolio

harvest

to reduce all unnecessary expenses to retain any remaining revenue

market modification

an extension of a product to new customers

product modification

alteration of products to fit the market

rapid penetration pricing strategy

strategy that sets a lower-price strategy; appropriate when volume sales
will increase market share quickly

rapid skimming strategy

strategy that sets a high price along with extensive advertising and
sales promotion to establish a product in the marketplace

slow penetration pricing strategy

strategy that sets low prices and little promotion to capture market
share slowly in a market not susceptible to promotion

slow skimming strategy

strategy that sets high prices with low advertising and sales promotion
investment
