m00058

13bfa896-d1be-4f2f-9adb-e8091a29a905

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define branding and discuss its benefits.

Discuss ways in which an organization can build strong brands.

# Branding {#sect-00002}

A brand is an intangible asset with tangible value. We cannot see,
touch, or put a brand on a balance sheet. Rather, a brand is a feeling
that is made up of the organization's promotion efforts along with
consumer meaning. The value of a brand is challenging to measure, but it
is often the most valuable part of a company.

Think about the Harley-Davidson brand (see [\#](#)). What images and
feelings does it evoke? Those images and feelings are its brand, and
companies spend a lot of resources developing and nurturing their
brands. The brand is the reason that customers purchase and advocate. A
brand is the feeling associated with a product or service that gives it
currency in the marketplace. The brand is the essence of the product or
service and must be reinforced at every touchpoint. The marketing team
at Harley-Davidson knows this all too well. Brand is Harley's business,
and the company knows that every product, every promotion, and every
event must reinforce the brand, which will build value over time to
become a significant asset.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Branding is the process of developing a brand. Successful brands engage
their customers on a personal level, connecting to their emotions and
needs. Some of the assets of a brand, such as the brand name, brand
mark, or brand positioning, can be influential in creating a feeling
about a brand.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
Logos
:::

Visit the [Harley-Davidson website](#) for more logo examples. While
looking at the logos, think about its name. What emotions are associated
with the brand name and mark? While marketing teams can influence how a
brand is seen in the marketplace, consumers often define the brand.

Did you know that the colors used in logos have meaning? This [website
shares a handful of stories](#) behind the colors of famous logos.
::::

Brands are created experiences that are shared among most loyal
customers. Harley-Davidson customers experience the brand together
through events and organized rides, creating brand meaning and
contributing to the overall feeling.

# Benefits of Branding {#sect-00003}

The central benefit of branding is establishing a connection with
customers that encourages them to purchase the brand, creating a
financial return. But you may be wondering how companies can measure the
impact of their brand. Brand value is the financial asset associated
with a brand. Brand valuation occurs when a company is sold and becomes
a part of the financial transaction, along with the assets and
liabilities on the company's financial statements. There is no singular
measure of brand value, so the valuation process is subjective and may
be based on brand visibility, customer loyalty, and perception of the
brand, along with financial measures such as revenue.

Brand equity is the additional value that a brand has over a substitute.
If a consumer will pay more for one similar product over another because
of the brand, that difference represents its brand equity. For example,
Tide, owned by Procter & Gamble, is the market leader in the laundry
space. While its product may not differ significantly from its
competitors, Tide demands a higher price because of its brand equity.
The brand equity measure is the amount that a brand with equity can
charge over its counterparts. Take a moment and look up the price of
Tide and a few competitors. What does that tell you about Tide's brand
equity?

Kevin Lane Keller developed the brand equity model to illustrate how
brands can develop equity. He postulated that if a brand could develop
positive associations, it could charge more than its competitors. The
model begins with defining a brand through its identity. Brands should
answer the question, Who are you and how do you solve the consumers'
needs? The next level of the model determines a brand's meaning. On one
hand, how well does the brand perform, and on the other, how does it
meet consumers' social and psychological needs? The third level of the
framework is about feelings and thoughts. In other words, What do
consumers think of your brand and what judgements do they make about it?
Finally, the top of the pyramid examines brand resonance, or how much
connection, engagement, or loyalty the brand has with its consumers.

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
Keller's Brand Equity Model
:::

Keller's brand equity model is a prevailing framework that scholars use
to think about the concept of brand equity. Check out [this article](#)
to learn more about the model and how you could apply it to a brand.
::::

# Building Strong Brands {#sect-00004}

If a brand is a combination of the efforts made by the marketing team
and how consumers think, feel, and act, then there is some room for the
marketing team to build a strong brand. A strong brand is resonant in
the minds of consumers and solves their problems.

Building a strong brand begins with brand positioning, or the way the
brand signals emotions in consumers' minds. Brands can position
themselves based on an attribute---one aspect of the product or service.
For example, Taco Bell has positioned itself as the option for
late-night cravings. This singular aspect defines its positioning. The
problem with positioning based on an attribute is that it is easily
replicable by competitors.

The second method of positioning is benefiting the consumer---how the
product or service solves the consumer's problem. For example, the Eggo
brand's positioning is convenience. The brand solves the consumer's
morning rush issue by providing a convenient breakfast solution. The
benefits positioning works well for convenience products.

Lastly, a brand can position itself based on values. Values-based
positioning is the most robust brand positioning because it links to a
consumer's personal beliefs. For example, Ford uses the language "Built
Ford Tough" in its advertising to connect to American values of hard
work and determination. Ford's strategy is particularly effective
because brands can connect to consumers' sense of self and how they show
up to the world.

A product's brand name also clues consumers in to feelings, thoughts,
and attitudes. Therefore, marketing teams spend a lot of time selecting
brand names that evoke a feeling harmonious with the brand. A strong
brand name also helps consumers see the benefit of the brand. For
example, a favorite of many, Kellogg's Frosted Mini-Wheats, tells the
consumer that they are eating something made of wheat with a touch of
sugar.

A brand name should also translate effectively into a variety of
languages. Finally, a brand name should be unique to that product. For
example, we all know that the brand Pop-Tarts is a toaster pastry that
pops out of a toaster. This is a distinctive element of the Pop-Tarts
brand that is exemplified by its name.

Brands use trademarks (service marks) to ensure that they are protected
under the law. According to the United States Patent and Trademark
Office, a trademark can be any "word, phrase, symbol, design or a
combination of these things that identified your goods and services."
Brands can trademark their names, logos, packaging, or even specific
colors that represent the brand. This ensures that competitors do not
replicate a known brand and cause confusion among customers. You will
know that a brand is trademarked if you see a "TM" or "R" near the name
or logo. Take a peek in your pantry to view trademarks on food
packaging.

Brands can be owned in one of four ways: national brand, private brand,
licensed brand, or co-brand. Each has its unique set of advantages and
disadvantages, which will be discussed in this section.

National brands are the name brands that sell a product or service under
its corporate name and identity. Brands like Heinz, Smartwater, and
Morton's Salt are examples of name brands. Brand equity commands higher
prices, so national brands typically charge higher prices than their
private brand counterparts. National brands often pay for premium retail
space, making them a convenient choice for shoppers. However,
price-sensitive shoppers may be turned off by the higher prices of
national brands.

Private-label brands are store brands that are similar products to a
national brand and labeled privately. If you have shopped at a
Walgreens, you may have seen its private-label brand of products that
begin with the prefix *Wal-*. A McKinsey study indicates that price
accounted for 45 percent of brand switchers from national to private
brands, while lack of availability was a secondary reason. The same
study suggests that customers can develop loyalty to private-label
brands. However, the private-label brand must create a point of
differentiation relevant to the target audience in the same way that a
national brand would.

Licensed brands provide the likeness of their brand as a fee for use. If
you wear eyeglasses, you likely have a licensed brand name on your
eyeglasses frame. Brands like Tiffany & Co., Kate Spade, and Tommy
Hilfiger do not produce eyeglasses frames. Rather, they license their
brand to manufacturers like Luxottica, an Italian eyewear company that
makes the product with the licensed brand name. Licensing a brand is a
quick way to gain recognition and benefit from the brand's equity. On
the other hand, licensing fees can be costly and ultimately reduce
profitability for manufacturers.

Finally, two or more brands may collaborate to co-brand; a product.
Co-branding brings the equity of each brand together for greater value.
For example, Doritos and Taco Bell developed Doritos Locos Tacos, a
co-branded line of tacos that feature Doritos as the shell and Taco Bell
ingredients as the toppings. In this case, the two brands had a similar
target audience and could benefit from the awareness and equity of the
other. However, co-branding necessitates a revenue split, which could
impact financial results for each brand. [\#](#) lists the advantages
and

  *Brand Type*      *Advantages*                                           *Disadvantages*
  ----------------- ------------------------------------------------------ --------------------------------------------------------------------
  National brands   Well-known by consumers; OK to charge more             Some consumers unwilling to pay more than for private-label brands
  Private brands    Attract price-sensitive customers                      More difficult to build brand equity
  Licensed brands   Gain brand recognition and benefit from brand equity   Expensive licensing fees
  Co-brands         Benefit from the equity of both brands                 Revenue split between two or more brands

  : Types of Brands: Advantages and Disadvantages {#table-00001}

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
Trader Joe's
:::

Most of us do not love our weekly grocery shopping trip. Aisles upon
aisles of boxes, cans, and cartons lining shelves create monotony in
shopping for the food that nourishes us. We have trudged through
supermarkets, pilling items into our carts uninspired---until Trader
Joe's entered the scene.

Trader Joe's has taken the drudgery of grocery shopping and created a
customer experience. Using the tenets of the Blue Ocean Strategy, Trader
Joe's removed the costly parts of the traditional grocery store such as
a large footprint and overwhelming stock that do not add to the customer
experience. And it added Hawaiian shirts, friendly employees,
interesting food selections, and a much smaller store. The result is a
true neighborhood store that is so popular that Trader Joe's fan groups
have popped up all over the Internet, and the cult brand has continued
growth since its inception.

So what's the magic in creating an experience out of what used to be a
chore? Trader Joe's looked at the customer experience from beginning to
end to determine what its shopper values and what can go by the wayside.

Trader Joe's prioritized building its culture through empowering its
"crew members." Employees at Trader Joe's are interviewed for enthusiasm
and cross-trained throughout the store's operations. Crew members are
Trader Joe's fans themselves and are known for giving recommendations to
customers and are empowered to connect with the customers, adding to the
neighborhood feel of the store. The food at Trader Joe's is interesting
to the shopper, much of it convenient and ready to eat. Trader Joe's
leverages social media to put its food front and center with recipes and
easy-to-prepare pairings. Trader Joe's thinks about the in-store
experience and stocks about 10 percent of the food of a normal
supermarket, making choices easier on the customer.
::::

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
Interbrand's Best Global Brands
:::

Interbrand ranks the best global brands annually. Take a look at the
[Interbrand website to see which brands make the top 100](#) and
consider what attributes led them to the top of the list.
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00005}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# References {#sect-00006}

:::: {#rf-007 .note}
::: title
:::

7\.

"Sales of the Leading Liquid Laundry Detergent Brands of the United
States in 2018," Statista, accessed May 19, 2022,
https://www.statista.com/statistics/188716/top-liquid-laundry-detergent-brands-in-the-united-states/.
::::

:::: {#rf-008 .note}
::: title
:::

8\.

Kevin Lane Keller and Vanitha Swaminathan,

Strategic Brand Management: Building, Measuring, and Managing Brand
Equity

, 5th ed. (Hoboken, NJ: Pearson, 2020).
::::

:::: {#rf-009 .note}
::: title
:::

9\.

"What Is a Trademark?," United States Patent and Trademark Office, last
modified June 13, 2022,
https://www.uspto.gov/trademarks/basics/what-trademark.
::::

:::: {#rf-010 .note}
::: title
:::

10\.

Steven Begley and Angus McOuat, "Turning Private Labels into Powerhouse
Brands," Retail Insights, McKinsey & Company, October 30, 2020,
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/retail/our-insights/turning-private-labels-into-powerhouse-brands.
::::

:::: {#rf-011 .note}
::: title
:::

11\.

Mark Mallinger and Gerry Rossy, "The Trader Joe's Experience,"

Graziadio Business Review

10, no. 2 (2007),
https://gbr.pepperdine.edu/2010/08/the-trader-joes-experience/.
::::

:::: {#rf-012 .note}
::: title
:::

12\.

Drew Wilkinson, "How Trader Joe's Makes the Experience Its Competitive
Advantage,"

Customer Service Blog

, Fonolo, updated November 17, 2021,
https://fonolo.com/blog/2019/03/how-trader-joes-makes-customer-experience-its-competitive-advantage/.
::::

# 

brand

an intangible asset with tangible value; made up of promotion efforts
and customer meaning

brand equity

the additional value that a brand has over a substitute

branding

the process of developing a brand

brand name

the official name of a brand

brand positioning

the way a brand signals emotions in consumers' minds

brand value

the financial asset associated with a brand

co-brand

to bring the equity of two brands together for greater value

licensed brands

brands that provide the likeness of their brand as a fee for use

national brands

name brands that sell a product or service under its corporate name and
identity

private-label brands

store brands that are similar products to a national brand and labeled
privately

trademarks (service marks)

symbols that show legal ownership of a brand name or brand mark
