m00059

e5bb0ff2-8a3b-40d2-9f03-8b50f8025d4a

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify branding strategies.

Describe degrees of brand loyalty.

Discuss metrics that can be used to measure brand strength and value.

# Brand Development {#sect-00002}

New products can be added to a brand at any time. There are a few ways
to add products that are classified on two measures: new/existing brand
name and new/existing product category (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Line extensions create new opportunities for an existing product and
brand to serve customers. For example, the Oreo brand adds flavors to
its product line for holidays. These line extensions provide the
existing brand with an extension of its current product. As a result, a
line extension may sell more products to already-aware and interested
customers without many risks. However, sometimes brands may overextend
their product lines and products may be too similar, failing to increase
sales.

Brand extensions leverage the brand name to new product categories. For
example, Starbucks developed a line of bottled coffees under its
corporate brand name. A brand extension uses awareness and equity in the
brand to gain instant recognition and affinity for the new product,
which may increase sales rapidly. However, if the new product is
inferior to the brand's known quality, the entire brand portfolio may be
at risk.

Multibrands are new brand names within a company's existing product
category. For example, Nabisco manufactures various cookies within a
product line but is marketed with different brand names. In this case,
Chips Ahoy, Oreo, and Teddy Grahams all have brand equity on their own
and do not need the benefit of the Nabisco brand. Each of these brands
has a significant market share, so there is a benefit to retaining a
multibranding approach. However, a multibranding approach does not work
when the products have a small market share or fail to gain favorable
retail shelf space to encourage sales.

New brands are an entirely different entity from the parent company. A
new brand strategy can be effective if the new product or service is
markedly different from the existing offering and benefits from its own
branding. For example, the Starbucks brand owns Ethos Water. Ethos is in
a beverage category other than Starbucks's primary offering and retains
its name. A new brand strategy works well when the new brand is distinct
from the parent brand and has a defined target market and positioning;
however, a marketing strategy for a new brand can be expensive to
maintain over time.

# Brand Loyalty Levels {#sect-00003}

As you can see, brands spend time and resources to gain loyal customers.
Loyal customers are the holy grail of marketing because they will
purchase your brand and advocate for the brand to others. Loyal
customers become instant word of mouth, spreading the positive
attributes of a brand. However, not all customers are intensely loyal to
one brand. Instead, customers fit into one of four loyalty categories
(see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

Switchers are customers who continually change their purchasing
behaviors. Switchers may be motivated by price, convenience, or
innovation. Therefore, it is essential to develop a product or service
that meets the switching consumers' needs to retain them as customers.
For example, a switcher might purchase the lowest-price laundry
detergent each time they are at the store.

Shifting loyals are customers who are loyal to one product or service
for a time, then turn their loyalty to a different product or service
for the second period. Brands can expect that shifting loyal customers
will move back and forth between products and services. For example, a
shifting loyal might purchase a Toyota followed by a Honda, then turn
their loyalty back to Toyota for a third purchase.

Split loyals are customers who have a consideration set of two to three
products or services in the category. The split loyal is willing to buy
this select set of brands on any occasion without hard-core loyalty to
any in the group. However, brands can convert split loyals into
hard-core loyals with product/service consistency, loyalty programs, and
marketing efforts. For example, customers may have loyalty to Gap,
Banana Republic, and J.Crew for workwear.

Hard-core loyals are the customers that every brand wants. They are
tried-and-true customers who will generally only purchase one brand in a
category. For example, when purchasing from a catalog, they tend to make
a purchase with less concern about price. In addition, hard-core loyals
often tell friends and family about their purchases, extending
word-of-mouth marketing for the brand. Brands need to retain hard-core
loyal customers. For example, Dunkin' knows that loyalty is essential to
its business, so it rewards its loyal customers with free food and
coffee through its DD Perks program.

# Metrics to Measure Brand Effectiveness {#sect-00004}

Brand sentiment is challenging to measure. Unlike sales or revenue,
sentiment is not easily quantifiable. However, brands must measure their
effectiveness because organizations invest heavily in building brands.
There are three ways to quantify a brand's impact: brand lift, brand
engagement, and brand preference.

Brand lift measures perception over time. To determine whether the
campaign improved perceptions, brands can survey customers and
noncustomers about their perception of a brand pre-campaign and again
post-campaign. Keep in mind that positive perception doesn't necessarily
mean that people will make a purchase; it simply indicates a positive
affect toward the brand.

Brand engagement measures how deeply the customer identifies emotionally
with a brand. Deeply engaged customers typically make more purchases,
advocate for the brand, and become loyal customers. Social media
metrics, time spent on site, subscriptions, and bounce rate are ways to
measure brand engagement.

Brand preference measures consumer behavior by determining the degree to
which a brand is preferred over others in the category. Brand preference
is the most accurate of the three measures in predicting sales, as its
focus is on behavior over attitudes. Marketing research is the best way
to assess brand preference.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
Profit Margins
:::

Profit margins are a widely used financial measure to determine the
profitability of a business, considering the cost to manufacture and
sell a product or service and measuring how much of every dollar in
sales or services your company keeps from its earnings. Cost of goods
sold, or COGS, describes expenses directly attributable to the product
or service. It is important to deduct COGS from profitability to fully
understand how much direct costs impact profitability. However, expenses
don't end once manufacturing costs are considered. Companies pay for
overhead, such as office space, trucks, and warehouses. They also
account for depreciation on their assets, pay taxes, and incur costs for
employee salaries. All of these expenses chip away at profitability.
Profit margin calculates profitability after expenses.

There are two types of profit margin on an income statement: gross
profit and net profit.

Gross profit margin equates to net sales minus the cost of goods sold.
The gross margin shows the amount of profit made before deducting
selling, general, and administrative (SG&A) costs. The formula for gross
profit margin is

$${Gross}~{Profit}~{Margin} = \frac{\left( {{Net}~{Sales} - {COGS}} \right)}{{Net}~{Sales}} \times ~100$$

The calculation is expressed as a percentage.

Net profit margin takes the calculation one step further. It deducts all
expenses from profitability, including administrative, sales,
amortization, debt payments, taxes, income, and asset depreciation. This
provides a more accurate look at profitability because it considers all
the costs associated with producing and selling the product or service.
The formula for net profit margin is

$${Net}~{Profit}~{Margin} = \frac{\left( {{Revenue} - {COGS} - {Other}~{Taxes}~\&~{Expenses}} \right)}{Revenue} \times ~100$$

The calculation is expressed as a percentage.

*Suppose your sandwich shop is interested in its profit margins for a
single order. Look at the chart and calculate the gross and net profit
margins.*

  -------------------------------------------------- --------
  Total revenue                                      \$6.25
  COGS                                               \$3.50
  Administrative, sales                              \$0.75
  Taxes, depreciation, debt payments, amortization   \$0.50
  -------------------------------------------------- --------

Gross profit margin: 44%

Net profit margin: 24%

*Which measure is more accurate?*

Net profit margin considers all expenses, so it is a more accurate
measure than gross profit margin that only considers COGS.

*Your business partner, Priya, wants to decrease the revenue of a single
order to \$5.50. How will that impact your profit margins?*

Profitability per order will decrease if revenue decreases unless COGS
or other expenses are reduced in turn.
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00005}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# 

brand engagement

measure of how deeply the customer identifies emotionally with a brand

brand extensions

products that leverage the brand name to new product categories

brand lift

measure of customer and noncustomer perception of a product over time

brand preference

measure of the degree to which a brand is preferred over others in the
category

cost of goods sold

expenses directly attributable to the product or service

gross profit margin

comparison of profit before expenses to total revenue

hard-core loyals

tried-and-true customers who will generally only purchase one brand in a
category

line extensions

products that create new opportunities for an existing product and brand

multibrands

new brand names within a company's existing product category

net profit margin

calculation that deducts all expenses from profitability

new brands

an entirely different brand entity from a parent company

profit margins

a widely used financial measure to determine the profitability of a
business; considers costs to manufacture and sell a product or service

shifting loyals

customers who are loyal to one product or service for a time, then turn
their loyalty to a different product or service at another time

split loyals

customers who have a consideration set of two or three products or
services in a category

switchers

customers who continually change their purchasing behaviors
