m00060

c841c09d-d783-4582-a473-f03fc244cfd6

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Describe how an organization creates value through packaging and
labeling.

Explain how packaging is used as a marketing tool.

# Creating Value through Packaging and Labeling {#sect-00002}

If you have ever purchased from Apple, you know the power of sleek
packaging. Apple is known for its simple white design packaging with
metallic logos. Products are visually appealing in their packages, and
unboxing an Apple product feels like an experience. Apple's packaging is
as innovative as its products, which brings us to an important lesson in
packaging. The package and label must represent the brand effectively
(see [\#](#)). While not one of the 4Ps of marketing, packaging is an
important element of the marketing mix based on its close tie to the
product. Packaging is also a critical shopper marketing tool as related
to place. And, certainly, effective packaging can be its own form of
promotion.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

A package essentially serves as a container for the product. It has a
functional purpose to protect the product from harm. Package designers
are first and foremost concerned with protecting the product and
secondarily with designing an appealing package and label that piques
interest on store shelves and online retailers' websites.

There are a variety of benefits to effective packaging and labeling. The
first is that consumers see packaging before seeing a product. This
provides a sensory experience that can influence a purchase. Colors,
fonts, and logos can appeal to the eye, while packaging material can
appeal to the sense of touch. These clues give a customer a sense of
what to expect inside the package.

Additionally, the package reflects the brand, cuing the customer in to
the brand feeling. For example, LaCroix is flavored carbonated water
sold in brightly colored cans. The cans, as seen below, attempt to make
the customer feel the excitement of opening a tasty carbonated beverage
(see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

The functional benefits of packaging are numerous. First, a package
serves to store the product to protect it from harm in transit from
manufacturer to customer. Items such as foam and cardboard shield the
product from damage and keep it clean. Second, packaging can also serve
as convenience and safety for customers to carry items and store them in
the home. For example, Tide Pods are sold in a plastic container with a
child-locked lid. This packaging is convenient for customers to safely
store the pods in their home.

Third, packaging can aid in the product's usability or become a part of
the product experience itself. For example, drinkable yogurt is sold in
small bottles. The bottles become part of the product experience when a
consumer takes a sip of the yogurt. Fourth, packaging and labeling can
aid in a brand's compliance with the law. For example, the Federal Trade
Commission Act of 1914 stipulates that false, misleading, or deceptive
labels or packaging may be upheld as unfair competition. Thus, packaging
and labeling allow a brand to be clear, accurate, and transparent in
communication with customers.

Packaging can also have perceptual benefits to customers as they seek to
associate with brands. Brand packaging containing logos might indicate
status of the customer or signal the customer's values pertaining to
quality. Tiffany & Co. is known for its "little blue box," a package
that indicates status and a quality product inside (see [\#](#)). The
blue color of the box is a copyrighted by Tiffany as part of its brand's
intellectual property.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

# Packaging Used as a Marketing Tool {#sect-00003}

Packaging can be used to differentiate a brand, either through design or
functionality. For example, beautifully designed packages, such as
Tiffany's little blue box, differentiate the brand through its status.
Meanwhile, functional packaging, such as potato chip bags filled with
air, serves as differentiation to deliver uncrushed chips.

Packaging can also create a customer experience. Unboxing a product can
contribute to the positive emotions associated with a brand. Artisans
who sell goods on Etsy understand packaging as a contributor to customer
experience. Artisans will often take special care to package goods
beautifully with a handwritten note of gratitude. Personalization and
packaging make Etsy customers feel involved in an experience.

Packaging can display the value of a product. A well-designed,
attractive package demonstrates value instead of a package that
frustrates a consumer. For example, American Girl dolls are packaged in
a box with a window to show the doll's face and serve as a keepsake for
the owner. The packaging is so popular that some collectors purchase the
package without a doll.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00004}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# References {#sect-00005}

:::: {#rf-013 .note}
::: title
:::

13\.

"Federal Trade Commission Act,"

Encyclopaedia Britannica

, August 16, 2017,
https://www.britannica.com/event/Federal-Trade-Commission-Act.
::::

:::: {#rf-014 .note}
::: title
:::

14\.

"Tiffany Blue," Tiffany & Co. Newsroom, Tiffany & Co., last modified
December 14, 2020, https://press.tiffany.com/our-story/tiffany-blue/.
::::
