m00061

66397e5e-2e86-4fcf-b567-2a9db2df7e74

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Describe environmental concerns with respect to product packaging.

Discuss strategies that are being used to address environmental
concerns.

# Environmental Concerns in Product Packaging {#sect-00002}

Consumers are increasingly concerned about the environmental impact of
packaging and its contribution to waste. A study by McKinsey indicates
that more than half of US consumers are highly concerned about the
impact of product packaging. While it is not a top criterion for
purchase, product packaging is a consideration among consumers.
Furthermore, consumers are willing to purchase products that have green
packaging, such as recycled plastics and fiber-based substitutes.

Groceries are typically packaged in glass, cardboard, plastic, and metal
cans. Single-serve plastics are a concern when used for groceries, as
they cannot be recycled. Electronics and other fragile products may be
packaged with cardboard and foam, which can find their way into
landfills. In addition to the energy used to manufacture the product,
packaging adds to the environmental burden. Discarded product packaging
can be found in landfills, as street litter, and in water sources,
harming the environment. Creation of product packaging depletes critical
resources, such as trees, and adds to air pollution.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
How Much Plastic Floats in the Great Pacific Garbage Patch?
:::

[Check out this website that describes the impact](#) of the Great
Pacific Garbage Patch. Think about the impact that packaging has on the
environment and what you can do to reduce your personal plastic waste.
::::

Companies are innovating on packaging to make it sustainable. As you may
see at a restaurant like Chipotle, brands are adopting more fiber-based
packaging and compostable, and recyclable options (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Companies are also looking at ways to reduce packaging to only its
necessary components. Boxed Water Is Better has adopted a cardboard box
for its water that is 75 percent paper and 100 percent recyclable (see
[\#](#)). The packaging is free of BPA and other chemicals. The paper is
ethically sourced and shipped flat to reduce the amount of space in a
truck, further reducing the company's carbon footprint.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

Cradle-to-cradle packaging design takes the waste out of the life cycle
of a package. The package is designed to be something that can be reused
or 100 percent recycled. It is meant to imitate nature's processes by
being regenerative. A cradle-to-cradle approach uses renewable energy
and keeps parts of the biological world within the biological world. In
a similar way, some consumer goods flow in a technical cycle, so that
the material resources can be generated into new products (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

E-commerce introduces an additional challenge: How can companies
sustainably ship single products to a customer? Companies must consider
protecting the item, efficiency, cost, and sustainability in their
e-commerce packaging. Companies can reduce packaging and use recycled or
recyclable materials in their packaging. Additionally, companies can
provide return-ready packaging so packages that need to be returned to
the manufacturer are the same packages that arrive with the product.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00003}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# References {#sect-00004}

:::: {#rf-015 .note}
::: title
:::

15\.

David Feber et al., "Sustainability in Packaging: Inside the Minds of US
Consumers," Insights on Paper, Forest Products & Packaging, McKinsey &
Company, October 21, 2020,
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/paper-forest-products-and-packaging/our-insights/sustainability-in-packaging-inside-the-minds-of-us-consumers.
::::

:::: {#rf-016 .note}
::: title
:::

16\.

"Is Boxed Water Really Better?," Boxed Water, accessed December 10,
2021, https://boxedwaterisbetter.com/pages/how-we-compare.
::::

# 

cradle-to-cradle packaging design

product design that eliminates waste from the life cycle of package
