m00062

2b22ab85-3c59-4995-a7f6-6ee8e7f75248

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Explain ethical issues with respect to product packaging.

Discuss product safety and ethical packaging trends.

# The Importance of Ethics in Product Packaging {#sect-00002}

In addition to concerns about sustainability, marketing professionals
must be mindful of ethical concerns regarding packaging. Remember, a
consumer can see the package on the store shelf, not the product inside.
The customer is seeking guidance, explanation, and assurance of a
product's quality from the packaging. The package must not mislead
customers about the size, quality, ingredients, or health claims. The
graphics on a package must also properly represent the product inside.
For example, a package might display a photo of a product that is larger
or more substantial than the product inside, leading the consumer to
erroneously believe that the product matches the photo.

Product packaging should be effective in protecting the product.
Therefore, brands have a responsibility beyond sustainability to design
packaging that ensures that the product survives transport from the
manufacturer, to the wholesaler, to the retailer, and finally home with
the customer. Think about the last time you purchased eggs at the
grocery store. The eggs are quite fragile, but they are packaged in such
a way that minimizes damage as the container travels from the farm to
your home. It would be unethical for a brand to reduce packaging to save
money and leave the consumer with a damaged product.

Additionally, product packaging informs the customer of important safety
issues. For example, a package with small parts might have a warning
that it is a choking hazard for children under the age of three.

Companies must consider groups beyond their customers. Government,
advocacy groups, and NGOs may influence ethical packaging. Some experts
predict that ethical packaging will become a legal mandate, so brands
have an incentive to think about packaging today and prepare for a more
sustainable future.

#  {#sect-00003}

Products are the consumer offering. They are the reason that the
customer is making a value exchange. Products and services differ but
are inextricably linked through experiences. Consumer products are
classified in four ways based on consumer behavior, price, and
distribution. Meanwhile, business and industrial products are classified
by materials, parts, capital items, and supplies/services.

Products are often not the only offering for a company. Rather, products
are sold in product lines and mixes to maximize consumer choice and
profitability. Companies may stretch or fill their product lines to
appeal to new customers or create new options for existing offerings. A
product lives through a product life cycle, including introduction,
growth, maturity, and decline, all of which consider revenue and growth.
Marketing decisions are often made based on where a product is in the
product life cycle. Companies may use levers such as product innovation,
pricing, and promotion to encourage purchase.

Ultimately, products become part of a brand. A brand is a feeling that
is evoked and a reason that consumers might make a purchase. Brand
equity is an intangible asset with tangible value for a company, so it
must be protected. Brands position themselves in consumers' minds to
capture brand equity. Developing a brand can occur through extension or
creating a new offering. Consumers have varying degrees of brand
loyalty, which can be measured through preference, lift, and engagement.

Packages are more than containers for products, they are also an
extension of the brand. They are useful in brand identity,
differentiation, and customer experience. Packaging and labeling also
serve functional benefits such as storage, convenience, protection,
safety, usability, and legality. Brands should be mindful that packaging
has an environmental impact. Brands are continually innovating their
packaging designs to meet sustainability expectations.

#  {#sect-00004}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00005}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00006}

Can you honestly say that you "own" who you are? Do your habits and
mannerisms belong to you? Are you comfortable in your skin?

In her TED Talk, Harvard professor Amy Cuddy discusses how body language
impacts how others perceive you. Our nonverbals give others a perception
about who we are and how we are feeling. Our body language conveys
dominance, much like animals do to show their power. Our posture and the
space that we take up signals confidence. But sometimes we take cues
from others. If our conversation partner is showing dominance, our body
language might shrink in response. It turns out that posing for
dominance changes the way we think and act. So use body language to your
advantage next time you are trying to make an impression.

Watch Amy Cuddy's video "Your Body Language May Shape Who You Are" and
develop a perspective on how you can use body language to develop your
personal brand. Specifically, write a 1-to-2-page document outlining
what you will start doing and what you will stop doing, and explain why.
Your professor might even enjoy seeing a photo of your "power pose."

[Your Body Language May Shape Who You Are \| Amy Cuddy \| TED](#)

#  {#sect-00007}

A product manager is the keeper of a brand. Their job is to develop the
product strategy---the what, where, when, and how much of a product.
Then, a product manager coordinates a cross-functional team of
professionals from marketing, development, finance, legal, operations,
manufacturing, supply chain, and more to bring the product to market
successfully and shepherd the product through its life cycle. Product
managers understand how strategy underpins a product's success in the
market and serves as a path to grow the brand.

Interview a product manager to determine the following:

What is their philosophy on successful product management from launch
through the product life cycle?

What does their job entail? Who are the key members of their product
ecosystem?

What is the career path that led them to this role?

Product managers can be found at companies of all sizes, including both
B2B and B2C. You can use your network on LinkedIn or your professor to
source an interviewee.

#  {#sect-00008}

Complete the following information about the company and
products/services you chose to focus on as you develop the marketing
plan throughout the course. You may need to conduct research in order to
obtain necessary information.

Instructions: Using the Marketing Plan Template file you created from
the [Marketing and Customer Value](#) assignment and expanded upon in
[Strategic Planning in Marketing](#), [Market Segmentation, Targeting,
and Positioning](#), and [Marketing Research and Market
Intelligence](#), complete the following section of your marketing plan:

Marketing Strategy: Product

Submit the marketing plan to your instructor for grading and feedback.

#  {#sect-00009}

## Ramblewood {#sect-00012}

In 2018, husband and wife duo Zach and Riley McDonald began getting a
flood of requests to help with events. Each of them individually had
significant talents. They were great foodies, and they understood good
food both in taste and in presentation. Their combined skill for
aesthetics in design, display, color, and texture was remarkable. And
they were both gifted at bringing everything together and staging it all
like a flawlessly produced Broadway show.

When the idea to create a business doing event planning started to
become a reality, both were employed full-time while also tending to
their young family. To say their plates were full was an understatement.
However, after helping with a few events, the duo realized they had a
passion for event planning, and they both really enjoyed working with
people, helping others to bring their dreams to reality.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Zach and Riley were both very involved in their community, and they were
often guests at events around town. They noticed a lack of coordination
between all the moving event components---planning, floral design, event
rentals, decor, and catering. Was there a marketplace need to coordinate
an event from beginning to end?

After putting together a few events for friends and acquaintances, they
received rave reviews. Requests started pouring in for their services.
With a keen eye for every detail and methodical oversight for all facets
of an event, the Ramblewood team had a unique niche in its market. And
with a robust start, Ramblewood came to life.

Ramblewood had a compelling value proposition in that it was a
one-stop-shop for all event components. It was not uncommon for an event
host to research, interview, and coordinate with musicians, furniture
and linen rentals, caterers, florists, bakers, digital designers, and
printers. Ramblewood would do it all and coordinate it seamlessly to
take some of the stress off the work of an event.

While weddings might be the primary event market, Ramblewood had a
strong following with corporations, family reunions, baby showers,
bridal showers, and birthday parties. No event was too big or small for
Ramblewood. If clients wanted to host an event to flawlessly match a
vision, Ramblewood could make it a reality.

With over a decade of art and design experience, Zach and Riley were
able to sit down with their clients and hear about their dreams and
visions to bring them to reality. The team had a special skill for
looking at creative ways to stretch the budgets and create focal points
that would make an experience unforgettable.

As the business was getting off the ground, Zach and Riley wondered how
to scale and still create the unique experience expected by every event.
However, they were worried that quick growth might damage their unique
brand. The two wanted to maintain the integrity of the brand. Every
event deserved to have the same attention to detail and beauty they had
built in to their very first event.

Zach and Riley quickly realized that every event they managed was in
fact their "calling card." Guests who attended Ramblewood events talked
about the experience. Guests discussed the beauty of the flowers, the
exceptional food, the layout and decor, and most importantly, how well
the event flowed. Each event had elements that created "oohs" and "ahs"
that prompted the question, Who created this event? Marketing through
word of mouth and social media seemed to be creating the growth engine
Zach and Riley were seeking.

The essence of the Ramblewood brand was to create the vision and develop
a magical experience for every guest in attendance. "From small intimate
home parties or dinners, to large upscale corporate events, we love them
all. We love hearing what the event is about and who it is for and then
custom building your event into a true lasting experience" was
Ramblewood's mission.

After four years of unforgettable events, the duo chose to extend their
brand with an upscale gourmet grocery market to deliver event elements
in one location. Market customers could stop in and take a little bit of
Ramblewood home. Ramblewood created RMarket---a place for a few magical
moments available for everyone, including napkins, flowers, food, decor,
and dishes.

The small company Zach and Riley launched was growing rapidly, and its
brand was associated with the best events in the South. Growth was
coming with the addition of its gourmet food market, and the two were
looking for the next steps for their business.

To learn more about Ramblewood, [visit its website](#).

## Case Questions {#sect-00011}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# References {#sect-00010}

:::: {#rf-017 .note}
::: title
:::

17\.

Amy Cuddy, "Your Body Language May Shape Who You Are," filmed June 28,
2012, in Edinburgh, Scotland, TEDGlobal 2012 video, 20:46,
https://www.ted.com/talks/amy_cuddy_your_body_language_may_shape_who_you_are.
::::

:::: {#rf-018 .note}
::: title
:::

18\.

http://www.ramblewoodco.com/events
::::

:::: {#rf-019 .note}
::: title
:::

19\.

"Wedding Specialists: Ramblewood,"

CityScope Magazine,

https://cityscopemag.com/city-scope/wedding-specialists-ramblewood/
::::
