m00104

ffa140d8-7ddf-4f97-81fe-2c77a7372a67

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

When Dominik Richter, Thomas Griesel, and Jessica Nilsson launched
meal-kit provider HelloFresh in October 2011, they did what many
successful entrepreneurs seek to do: disrupt a market. While the idea of
not having to plan and shop for dinner meals seems enticing for
consumers, changing consumer behavior is a challenging task.

HelloFresh needed to convince consumers to stop planning and shopping
for meals the way they've always done it. The founders recognized that
they needed the right combination of traditional direct and online
direct marketing tools to persuade consumers to make a hard pivot.

It [starts with the HelloFresh website](#), which offers a beautifully
designed, user-friendly experience that makes customizing meals,
scheduling delivery, and placing orders easy and secure. HelloFresh also
uses social media to drive visitors to respond to a variety of calls to
action. For example, website visitors are presented with a variety of
offers aimed at persuading them to try HelloFresh, including free
shipping, surprise gifts, and free meals.

HelloFresh also recognizes the power of direct mail by sending offers
similar to those presented on its website and social media to targeted
consumers at home via the US Postal Service. It's clear that there is
integration between HelloFresh's digital messaging and its direct mail
pieces.

HelloFresh has certainly reaped the rewards of an excellent direct and
online direct marketing strategy. In 2021, HelloFresh led the market
with more than 7.2 million subscribers.

Check out these additional resources about Hello Fresh:

Hello Fresh Instagram

Hello Fresh Twitter

Hello Fresh LinkedIn

Consumer Affairs Reviews

Taste of Home Review

# Endnotes {#sect-00001}

:::: {#rf-001 .note}
::: title
:::

1\.

"Number of Active Subscribers of HelloFresh and Blue Apron from 2016 to
2021," Statista, accessed February 13, 2022,
https://www.statista.com/statistics/947620/meal-kit-companies-number-subscribers-worldwide/.
::::
