m00105

de412e9b-5a5c-44b1-8c99-1943f9b8f7a8

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

List and describe the various forms of traditional direct marketing.

Explain how the digital age has impacted direct marketing.

# Forms of Traditional Direct Marketing {#sect-00002}

Direct marketing involves using communication tools to engage directly
with individual consumers for the ultimate purpose of calling them to
take some marketing action (see [\#](#)). That action can be a consumer
visiting a website or calling a phone number. Ultimately, the goal is to
motivate the consumer to make a purchase. If you've received a catalog
in the mail or caught yourself watching an entire infomercial about the
newest kitchen gadget or gym equipment, you've experienced traditional
direct marketing as a consumer.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

## Direct-Mail Marketing {#sect-00003}

Direct mail arrives in people's homes every day and is typically
delivered by the US Postal Service. When marketers use direct-mail
marketing, they communicate promotional messages and offers directly to
people's homes or places of business. Examples of direct-mail marketing
include postcards featuring an offer, discount, or coupon code. Seasonal
catalogs and glossy look books that present the latest fashions are
additional examples.

Like all forms of direct marketing, direct mail is designed to call the
consumer to take an action, whether it's to visit a website, scan a QR
code, or call a phone number. It also is highly targeted in that
companies can send mail based on demographic characteristics such as
age, income, zip code, and buying behavior.

Direct mail has some key advantages over other forms of promotion.
First, as consumers are inundated with digital messages, direct mail
offers the opportunity to stand out and capture attention. Even mostly
digital-facing companies like Warby Parker (see [\#](#)) and Casper
(mattresses) have added direct mail to their promotion portfolios in an
attempt to stand out from other brands.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

Direct mail also reaches an entire household of people. This is an
important advantage for product categories where household members
typically discuss and decide on a product together.

Finally, direct mail has the characteristic of lingering. Other forms of
promotion, such as advertising and email marketing, don't have as long a
life span as direct mail. According to RetailWire, the average life span
of a direct mail piece is 17 days, which means that a household may
review that message repeatedly over the life of the mail piece.

The major disadvantage of direct mail is that many consumers consider it
to be junk and throw it out without every reading the offer. Also, mail
can take time to land in homes. Although the US Postal Service offers
speedier delivery options, these come at an increased cost.

## Catalog Marketing {#sect-00004}

Catalog marketing, also known as direct mail order, dates back to the
19th century and is one of the oldest forms of promotion. Catalogs
typically include a variety of products that are often vividly displayed
in a high-gloss magazine-like format.

Companies such as Lands' End and IKEA have long used catalogs to entice
consumers to call the phone number or visit the website displayed on the
catalog. The call to action is precisely what makes catalog marketing
direct marketing. Consumers are presented with vivid product images and
an offer such as free delivery or 20 percent off if the consumer
responds to the call to action.

According to a 2020 article published in *Harvard Business Review*,
catalogs are making a comeback. Consumers report being excited to
receive a catalog. In fact, response rates for catalogs have jumped 170
percent over the last decade.

Unlike emails and advertisements, catalogs remain in consumer homes long
after they arrive. Companies like Target and Amazon have used catalog
marketing to connect with customers and present featured products across
the seasons.

## Telemarketing {#sect-00005}

Telemarketing is a form of direct marketing that involves a company
representative placing or answering customer calls for the purpose of
guiding a consumer toward making a purchase. During the calls, the
representative or agent typically communicates offers to potential
customers. Like other forms of direct marketing, the goal is to motivate
the consumer to take some action, such as making a purchase or setting
up a follow-up appointment.

Telemarketing can be outbound or inbound. With outbound telemarketing, a
company representative contacts the prospective customer directly by
phone. With inbound telemarketing, demand for the product or service is
generated through other channels such as advertising, email, or direct
mail. In response to messages delivered through these channels, the
customer is motivated to contact the company directly regarding the
product or service.

Companies that manage large volumes of calls typically use a call
center, which is a centralized space where agents answer inbound calls
and place outbound calls. The call center serves as the centralized
location where customer information is collected or confirmed and then
the customer is directed to the right product or service representative.
With the explosion in the use of smartphones to search the web,
consumers can direct dial from any web page that presents a phone number
for contacting the company. Many inbound calls are routed to agents who
are located offshore in India and other countries.

Car dealerships often use telemarketing in combination with online
direct marketing tools to connect with buyers who show interest in a
vehicle listed in the dealership's online inventory. The dealership
website may invite consumers to complete a form, after which a sales
representative will call the consumer to set up a test drive appointment
or answer questions about availability.

Telemarketing can be effective in cases where the consumer expects a
phone call. The explosion of unsolicited phone calls from telemarketers,
however, has led to a rise in regulation around this direct marketing
tool. In 2003, the US government created the National Do Not Call
Registry, which bans unsolicited telemarketing calls. Consumers must opt
in and give permission to be called by a company. Businesses that do not
comply with the law face a hefty fine for violations.

## Direct-Response TV (DRTV) {#sect-00006}

Direct-response television marketing is a type of direct marketing that
is designed to compel viewers to take some immediate action, such as
calling a phone number or visiting a website presented during a
television commercial. The commercials typically involve a persuasive
demonstration of a product, after which consumers are provided with a
toll-free number or a website to order. The television stations QVC and
HSN are excellent examples of DRTV, selling everything from apparel to
appliances.

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
DRTV in Action
:::

This movie clip from the film *Joy* starring Jennifer Lawrence as
real-life entrepreneur Joy Mangano shows DRTV in action.

[Joy Movie CLIP - Calls (2015) - Jennifer Lawrence, Édgar Ramírez Drama
HD](#)
::::

DRTV commercials often run 60 or 120 seconds but can be shorter. DRTV
commercials that run for 30 minutes or longer are called infomercials.
Dollar Shave Club has garnered 27 million views of its famous
direct-response television commercial featuring founder Michael Dubin
hilariously identifying all the problems with traditional shave products
(see [\#](#)). The commercial features the website domain several times
and a clear call to action to the consumer to visit the site to learn
more.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

Infomercials often feature a spokesperson promoting the benefits of a
product. In many cases, there is a persuasive demonstration of the
product, and viewers are called to "act now." Some of the most
well-remembered infomercial products include the Snuggie, Magic Bullet,
and Proactiv. A carefully executed commercial coupled with the right
product can generate billions of dollars for companies. Proactiv, for
example, which was rebranded as Alchemee in 2022, generated \$1 billion
in sales in 2020 from its famous acne skin-care line.

Because it offers the advantage of capturing customers in real time and
because it's easy to measure, DRTV continues to be an effective direct
marketing tool.

## Seminars {#sect-00007}

Seminars allow companies to share their expertise and knowledge related
to a topic, issue, or industry. These can be done in person or virtually
and are a great tactic for developing trust and building relationships
with consumers. They have additional advantages that include building
greater brand awareness and introducing new products or services, and
they may ultimately lead to increased sales.

## Trade Shows {#sect-00008}

Trade shows are exhibition events that provide companies the opportunity
to present themselves and their products and services to industry peers.
Trade shows are suited for the business-to-business (B2B) market and are
sponsored and hosted by industry trade organizations. They are an
excellent way for industry professionals to network and grow their
businesses. They are also wildly popular. For example, one of the most
popular trade shows, Consumer Electronics Show, or CES, attracts
thousands of companies that showcase their latest technology. This trade
show serves as an intersection for industry professionals in the health,
gaming, and automotive spaces, and participants include tech companies
such as Google, Microsoft, and E3, among others.

Companies that participate in trade shows can benefit in the following
ways. First, trade shows allow company representatives to visit with
existing customers to grow current sales and further solidify their
partnership. They also give companies a chance to connect with and
present to new buyers.

Every year, MailCon brings together marketing professionals, brands, and
agencies to discuss the latest trends in email technology, strategy, and
automation. Major brands like Wayfair, Girl Scouts of the USA, Ford
Motor Company, and A&E Networks gather to network and learn about
advancements in the email marketing space.

:::: {#note-00007 .note}
::: title
Digital Marketing
:::

Digital marketing reaches customers where they are at---online. HubSpot
answers some of the most common questions it gets about [digital
marketing in this article](#).
::::

# How Has the Digital Age Impacted Marketing? {#sect-00009}

The digital age has changed the way marketers engage with customers and
build relationships. While the traditional channels of print,
television, and radio certainly present advantages, the digital age has
created opportunities for marketers to engage with consumers in a highly
personalized and interactive way.

# Online Direct Marketing Defined {#sect-00010}

While traditional forms of direct marketing center on engaging directly
with consumers through channels like mail and television, online direct
marketing uses a rich collection of digital tools to target individual
consumers with an offer that requests a response or action. The online
direct marketing tools covered in this section include website
marketing, email marketing, content marketing, online video marketing,
blogs, and online forums.

LendingTree is a great example of a fintech (financial tech) company
disrupting the traditional banking industry. LendingTree has
revolutionized the way consumers and banks participate in the lending
process. It excels at matching consumers searching for financing with
banks looking for qualified customers. It is LendingTree's digital
marketing tools that make this matching process possible.

A consumer who searches the web and lands on LendingTree's website is
invited to compare quotes and plans that are tailored to their age,
income level, and location by filling out an online form. LendingTree
then displays consumer-relevant plans and quotes based on their
demographics and follows up with an email inviting consumers to view
offers from financial institutions. If the customer is a Gmail user,
consumers may then see digital ads later on sites like YouTube and in
their Gmail inbox.

# Direct Meets Digital: The Evolution of Direct Marketing with Technology {#sect-00011}

The explosion in internet usage and online shopping coupled with the
evolution of digital technologies has resulted in the emergence of
online direct marketing. While traditional forms of direct marketing
remain important for engaging with consumers, the channel has evolved as
technology has evolved. With 3.5 billion smartphone users worldwide,
marketers recognize the value in engaging with consumers through mobile
devices. In the United States alone, 65.6 percent of Americans report
that they check smartphones 160 times a day.

In response to the explosion in smartphones and internet usage, online
direct marketing is getting a larger share of advertising spend. In
2020, advertisers spent \$139.8 billion on digital marketing, and that
number is expected to grow to \$200 billion by 2025.

# Forms of Online Direct Marketing {#sect-00012}

There are several online direct marketing tools that can be used (see
[\#](#)). Let's take a look at each tool in the following section.

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

## Website Marketing {#sect-00013}

Website marketing is the promotion of a website that results in driving
traffic or visitors to the site to learn more about the product or
company or to make a purchase. The purpose of website marketing is to
attract online shoppers who may be interested in a company's product or
service offering.

Developing a website is one of the most important steps a company can
take to establish a digital presence online. Websites serve a variety of
purposes. Some are designed to nurture consumers and guide them toward
making a purchase while others are designed to facilitate transactions.
For example, car manufacturers like Toyota and Honda use their websites
to deliver details and options related to their product lines. Consumers
can use interactive tools to change out features and colors based on
their preferences; however, consumers would likely visit a dealership to
make the actual purchase.

Amazon.com is designed to allow third-party sellers to share product
details, reviews, and product comparisons. Its purpose is to facilitate
a purchase transaction in which the consumer buys something directly
from the site. Shopify has recently emerged as the "anti-Amazon" by
offering sellers more than a dozen services ranging from e-commerce
websites to inventory management and payment processing.

There are still other websites whose purpose is not transactional but
that are designed to build community and engagement among customers.
Bleacher Report's website offers sports articles, game scores, and live
sports streaming. Fans are invited to comment and engage with one
another regarding the latest sports news. The website also offers the
option of signing up for its newsletter delivered to consumers' email
inboxes. Whether it's to communicate information, facilitate a
transaction, or build a community, websites should be designed with a
positive user experience (UX) in mind.

## Email Marketing {#sect-00014}

Email marketing is a type of direct marketing that is highly personal
and designed to build relationships with consumers. Marketers use email
to communicate promotions about products and share relevant content. It
offers the advantage of connecting companies with highly targeted
consumers at a much lower cost than other channels. Email usage
statistics are also impressive, making this channel attractive as an
online direct marketing tool.

Email boasts over 4 billion daily users; 99 percent of people report
checking their email on a daily basis. Given the low cost and high usage
rate, email marketing can be a profitable way to connect with customers.
Marketers generally send two types of emails: transactional emails and
marketing emails. A transactional email is a type of email that is sent
to customers following a commercial transaction, such as a purchase or a
return. When online shoppers purchase athletic apparel from Dick's
Sporting Goods, they receive an email confirmation confirming the order.

Marketing emails are promotional in nature and typically involve a
marketing offer. Old Navy sends marketing emails during major sales
events. They feature relevant product categories based on past purchases
and often include a coupon code or free-shipping promotion.

Buzzfeed provides another great example of a company that optimizes
email marketing to reach subscribers. According to Campaign Monitor, it
has created a collection of diverse and audience-catered newsletters
that are tailored to the preferences of Buzzfeed's subscribers. Emails
feature relevant articles and funny GIFs that prompt subscribers to
visit the site to read more. On average, subscribers who visit the site
via email spend more time on the site than those website visitors who
have come from other channels.

Regardless of their email marketing strategy, companies utilize email
marketing platforms like Mailchimp to reach target audiences. Mailchimp
is built for growing businesses, and in 2022 it launched a Super Bowl
advertising campaign to promote its services. As a martech (marketing
technology) company, it offers small businesses tools for guiding
consumers through a customer journey to a purchase. Mailchimp's
automation tool, specifically, allows businesses to send email campaigns
based on a consumer's interaction with an email message. The result is a
highly personalized email conversation between the small business and
the customer.

:::: {#note-00013 .note}
::: title
Mailchimp
:::

Learn how Mailchimp's CEO and cofounder, Ben Chestnut, built and grew
the Mailchimp email platform in this podcast: [NPR's How I Built This
with Guy Raz](#).

Check out the 2022 Super Bowl commercial with DJ Khaled here.

[Intuit QuickBooks and Mailchimp Super Bowl starring DJ Khaled.](#)
::::

Email marketing is also known as permission-based marketing.
Permission-based marketing requires that marketers get consent to send
email and text messages to consumers prior to contacting them with a
promotional message. Once a consumer opts in to receive an email or text
message, they are given the option to opt out by clicking on an
unsubscribe link or by reply texting a company to opt out of messages.

Consumers typically opt in to receiving emails when they place an online
order so that they may receive order confirmation and shipping updates.
In addition, consumers are also opting in to receive other value-added
content, such as exclusive discounts, access to a webinar, a free trial,
or some other type of value exchange.

## Content Marketing {#sect-00015}

Websites, email, and other forms of online marketing are only as good as
the content they carry. Content marketing involves creating and
distributing content that is valuable and relevant to a company's target
customers. New York--based Dotdash Meredith is a good example of this.
The company's digital brands include Verywell, The Spruce, Byrdie, and
others. Dotdash Meredith is a unit of Barry Diller's IAC. Company
policy: no pop-up ads!

As with other forms of direct marketing, content is about driving
customers to take some desired action. Consumers would much rather
consume a funny video clip, a highlight reel of their favorite athlete,
and an inspiring quote or comment than see banner ads and pop-up ads. In
order for content marketing to work, it must be useful, relevant, high
quality, and engaging to the targeted audience.

When content is delivered through social media, blogs, and email,
consumers have the opportunity to directly engage with the company and
other content consumers. They can like, share, retweet, and mark as a
favorite---all examples of actions taken in response to the content.
Marketers can use the data created by these actions to perform sentiment
analysis and generate other metrics. The challenge with content
marketing is that it is constantly changing. Companies are tasked with
constantly updating their content and continuing to tell stories that
their audience wants to hear and engage with.

## Online Video Marketing {#sect-00016}

Online video marketing involves creating videos that tell a story about
a product, company, or brand that is designed to drive consumer
engagement through activities such as liking, sharing, and retweeting.
Video marketing is becoming increasingly popular as a marketing tool
because the cost of creating video campaigns has dropped significantly
in the last decade due to technological advancements. Biteable, for
example, offers marketers a cost-effective way to create brand videos
that are quick, simple, and customizable.

Along with the drop in cost to produce online videos, consumer demand
for videos has increased. Because of this demand, Instagram, Facebook,
and Twitter have pivoted to video-first platforms. Wyzowl's annual State
of Video Marketing Survey revealed in 2021 that online video watching
has doubled since 2018 and that online marketers "feel positive about
the return on investment offered by video more than ever as it continues
to strongly influence traffic, leads, sales, and audience
understanding."

:::: {#note-00015 .note}
::: title
Wyzowl's Survey Found on HubSpot
:::

Read more about the key data points learned by Wyzowl in its 2022
survey. You might be interested to learn that 86 percent of businesses
use video as a marketing tool, 94 percent of companies believe videos
help customers better understand their product, and 99 percent of video
marketers said they will continue using video. [You can find the full
report here](#). There's a ton of interesting information!
::::

## Blogs and Online Forums {#sect-00017}

A blog is an online journal of interests, beliefs, or other topics
published by a person, a group of people, or an organization. In its
early stages, a blog was a personal journal that someone posted to the
web. It's since evolved into an online marketing tool that is typically
a website or a webpage and serves a variety of purposes.

First, a blog's purpose can be to share valuable and relevant
information with targeted audiences. Ultimately, the goal is to attract
visitors to the page or site and convert them to customers. In addition,
marketers create blog content on sometimes a weekly or even daily basis
so that consumers continue to visit the site or the page to access the
new content. When the blog content is good, visitors will continue to
engage with the articles produced by the company. Ultimately, this helps
a company's organic ranking on Google. In Google, your page or website
will rank higher on the Google search results page as it grows in
popularity and consumers click on it.

Blogs are also a great way to create and nurture online communities, or
groups of people with similar interests connecting to one another
online.

Customer relationship management company HubSpot is excellent at
creating high-quality blog content for marketing and business
professionals. It covers an array of professional topics, from marketing
to human resources management to communicating effectively in the
workplace. Its content ultimately drives visitors to its website, where
they'll find a suite of programs designed for marketing, sales, customer
service, and operations.

Blogging can be an integral part of a content strategy as long as
marketers dedicate time and resources to continue updating the content.
Visitors appreciate fresh and relevant information, and delaying the
delivery of high-quality content may mean a loss of visitor interest.

:::: {#note-00016 .note}
::: title
Content Marketing Tools
:::

Learn more about the types of content marketing tools marketers have to
work with [by reading this HubSpot article](#). Included are the types
you're probably more familiar with, like blogs and videos, but also
discussed are the ones you may not have as much experience with like,
white papers and case studies.
::::

# Advantages of Online Direct Marketing {#sect-00018}

There are several key advantages that make online direct marketing an
attractive tool for marketers. First, online direct marketing is not
restricted by geographical boundaries. The internet is readily available
to most consumers globally, making it practical to market around the
globe.

Second, online direct marketing is much less expensive than other forms
of marketing when considering its global reach. Imagine how expensive it
would be to send direct-mail catalogs to customers all over the world.
Establishing an online presence by developing a website and creating
video and blog content is relatively inexpensive compared to other forms
of promotion.

Third, online direct marketing is easy to measure in terms of campaign
performance. With advertising tools targeted to mass audiences, it's
difficult to attribute a sale to a particular television or radio
commercial. With online direct advertising, marketers can track the
performance of their campaigns based on consumers' interaction with
digital tools such as email, online videos, and a company's website. For
example, when Nike creates online video content that is posted on
YouTube and its website, Nike marketers can track consumers' engagement
with that content, in addition to the consumer's online journey. Online
direct marketing reveals real-time insights into the effectiveness of
campaigns compared to more traditional forms of promotion.

Fourth, online direct marketing is highly targeted. Marketers can
carefully focus promotion efforts on very specific groups of consumers
based on their geography, their social media channel preferences, and
other variables. Online direct marketing also allows for retargeting,
which occurs when consumers visit different websites but are shown
similar ads based on their online consumer behavior.

Finally, online direct marketing allows for real-time interaction
between brands and consumers. Consumers may start with a Google search
and end with the completion of an online purchase. Throughout the online
consumer buying process, marketers have the opportunity to engage with
the consumer in real time.

Traditional direct marketing and online direct marketing offer a variety
of benefits in connecting marketers to targeted consumers.

:::: {#note-00017 .note}
::: title
Digital Marketer
:::

Digital marketers build and implement a company's online-related
activities and sales. [Review this job description](#) and list of
qualifications from Glassdoor for more details. There are several
additional resources that will help you better understand the digital
marketing job role and what it will take to get a job in this field:

Ahrefs---A Source for Digital Marketing Tutorials: "How to Start a
Career in Digital Marketing (Step-by-Step)"

[How to Start a Career in Digital Marketing (Step-by-Step)](#)

Neil Patel: "How to Get a Digital Marketing Job with No Experience"

[How To Get a Digital Marketing Job with No Experience](#)

Digital Marketing Institute: "

7 of the Hottest Digital Marketing Jobs

"

Indeed: "

How to Get a Job in Digital Marketing in 7 Steps

"

Emerson College: "

5 Reasons to Choose a Career in Digital Marketing in 2022

"
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00019}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00020}

:::: {#rf-002 .note}
::: title
:::

2\.

Tom Ryan, "Does Direct Mail or Email Deliver Greater Results for
Retailers?," RetailWire, March 25, 2019,
https://retailwire.com/discussion/does-direct-mail-or-email-deliver-greater-results-for-retailers/.
::::

:::: {#rf-003 .note}
::: title
:::

3\.

Jonathan Z. Zhang, "Why Catalogs Are Making a Comeback,"

Harvard Business Review

, February 11, 2020,
https://hbr.org/2020/02/why-catalogs-are-making-a-comeback.
::::

:::: {#rf-004 .note}
::: title
:::

4\.

"National Do Not Call Registry FAQs," Consumer Advice, Federal Trade
Commission, May 2021,
https://www.consumer.ftc.gov/articles/national-do-not-call-registry-faqs.
::::

:::: {#rf-005 .note}
::: title
:::

5\.

Anne Stych, "Proactiv Rebrands, Moves from Acne into Other Areas of
Skincare," Bizwomen, American City Business Journals, January 21, 2022,
https://www.bizjournals.com/bizwomen/news/latest-news/2022/01/proactiv-rebrands-moves-from-acne-into-other-area.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-006 .note}
::: title
:::

6\.

"About Us," MailCon, last modified December 21, 2021,
https://mailcon.com/about/.
::::

:::: {#rf-007 .note}
::: title
:::

7\.

Deyan Georgiev, "67+ Revealing Smartphone Statistics for 2022," Tech
Jury, October 14, 2022,
https://techjury.net/blog/smartphone-usage-statistics/#gref
::::

:::: {#rf-008 .note}
::: title
:::

8\.

CJ Bangah, "What Is on the Horizon for Digital Advertising in 2022 and
Beyond?," LinkedIn, October 22, 2021,
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/what-horizon-digital-advertising-2022-beyond-cj-bangah/.
::::

:::: {#rf-009 .note}
::: title
:::

8\.

Katrina Kirsch, "The Ultimate List of Email Marketing Stats for 2022,"

The HubSpot Marketing Blog

, HubSpot, updated January 20, 2022,
https://blog.hubspot.com/marketing/email-marketing-stats.
::::

:::: {#rf-010 .note}
::: title
:::

9\.

Andrea Wildt, "5 Brands Crushing It with Email Marketing and
Automation,"

The Digital and Email Marketing Blog

, Campaign Monitor, May 29, 2019,
https://www.campaignmonitor.com/blog/email-marketing/5-brands-crushing-marketing-automation/.
::::

:::: {#rf-011 .note}
::: title
:::

10\.

"Watch DJ Khaled & How QuickBooks + Mailchimp Help Small Businesses in
Super Bowl Campaigns," Chhattisgarh News, accessed February 13, 2022,
https://world360news.com/en/watch-dj-khaled-how-quickbooks-mailchimp-help-small-businesses-super-bowl-campaigns.
::::

:::: {#rf-012 .note}
::: title
:::

11\.

Adam Hayes, "What Video Marketers Should Know in 2022, according to
Wyzowl Research,"

The HubSpot Marketing Blog

, HubSpot, January 26, 2022,
https://blog.hubspot.com/marketing/state-of-video-marketing-new-data.
::::

# 

blog

an online journal of interests, beliefs, and other topics published by a
person, a group of people, or an organization

call center

a centralized space where agents or representatives answer inbound calls
and place outbound calls

catalog marketing

also known as direct mail order and is one of the oldest forms of
promotion, which typically includes a variety of products often vividly
displayed in a high-gloss magazine-like format

content marketing

creating and distributing online content that is valuable and relevant
to a company's target customers

direct marketing

using communication tools that directly engage with individual consumers
for the ultimate purpose of calling them to take some marketing action

direct-mail marketing

a type of direct marketing that involves marketers sending mail directly
to people's homes or places of business; for example, catalogs and
postcards

direct-response television marketing

a type of direct marketing that is designed to compel viewers to take
some immediate action such, as calling a phone number or visiting a
website presented during a television commercial

email marketing

a type of direct marketing that is highly personal and designed to build
relationships with consumers

marketing emails

emails that are promotional in nature and typically involve a marketing
offer

online direct marketing

uses a rich collection of online tools, such as websites and email, to
target individual consumers with an offer designed to compel consumers
to take some action, such as visit a website or make an online purchase

online video marketing

involves creating videos that tell a story about a product, company, or
brand that is designed to drive consumer engagement through activities
such as liking, sharing, and retweeting

seminars

a tool that allows companies to share their expertise and knowledge
related to a topic, issue, or industry; can be done in person or
virtually

telemarketing

a type of direct marketing that involves a company representative
placing or answering customer phone calls with the intention of guiding
the consumer toward making a purchase

trade shows

exhibition events that provide companies the opportunity to present
themselves and their products and services to industry peers

website marketing

The promotion of a website that results in driving traffic or visitors
to the site to learn more about the product or company or to make a
purchase
