m00106

5d12968f-8fe1-4b98-865b-8c42213c33fd

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Discuss social media marketing and its opportunities and challenges.

Discuss mobile marketing and its opportunities and challenges.

# Social Media Marketing {#sect-00002}

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

As discussed in the previous section, internet and digital technology
usage have surged across the globe, creating opportunities for marketers
to engage with consumers in real time. Social media marketing has
emerged as a powerful online marketing tool as consumer time spent on
these platforms (see [\#](#)) has grown substantially over the last
decade. A growing share of Americans report that they use YouTube and
Facebook more than any other social media platform. In segments under
the age of 30, the most popular platforms are Instagram, Snapchat, and
TikTok.

## Social Media Marketing Defined {#sect-00003}

Social media marketing is defined as using social media platforms to
deliver content that drives engagement with your brand. Companies from
PepsiCo to Home Depot to the pizza restaurant located in town use social
media to connect with users, share content, and, ultimately, generate
sales. Marketers can create brand profiles and sponsored content that
they pay for.

Warby Parker uses Instagram to create high-quality content and showcase
different styles of eyeglasses based on face shape. Users may click on
the post, read and reply to comments, like it, mark it as a favorite, or
share it on their own feed. If they are in the market for new eyewear,
the social media post may drive them to the company's website, where
they can virtually try on different styles of eyeglasses and ultimately
make a purchase.

Social media marketing offers some advantages and disadvantages. The
advantages include that it is highly targeted, it allows for engagement
with and among users, it is a great tool for driving visitors to a
company's website, and it is easily measured.

## Uses of Social Media Marketing {#sect-00004}

Marketers recognize that social media presents an exciting opportunity
to connect with consumers across a variety of platforms. Unlike some
other forms of promotion, social media marketing allows marketers to
precisely target audiences. Marketers can create social media campaigns
that target demographic attributes such as gender, age, and location in
addition to psychographic attributes such as interests and viewing
behavior.

For example, Facebook allows marketers to upload a list of customers
that includes the demographic and psychographic attributes of the
company's target audience. Facebook then creates what's called a
"lookalike audience" that matches those customer attributes to the
attributes of Facebook users so that the company's ads will show up in
the feeds of the lookalike audience.

Social media marketing also creates the opportunity for users to engage
with one another and company content. It's an excellent vehicle for
marketers to distribute their online video and blog content in addition
to communicating promotional offers. Marketers can monitor engagement
and participate in ongoing conversations with users who comment, like,
and share content.

*Harvard Business Review* (HBR) provides a great example of how to use
social media marketing effectively. HBR, a business management magazine
published by the Harvard Business Publishing subsidiary of Harvard
University, offers paid subscribers the latest research and articles on
all things related to management.

During the pandemic, HBR gave people free access to all HBR content. The
campaign ran on social media and resulted in increased traffic at the
HBR website. This brings us to another important advantage of social
media marketing. It can create traffic or visitors that link from the
social media platform directly to the company's website.

Finally, social media marketing is highly measurable. Online marketers
can evaluate key engagement metrics such as clicks, likes, and shares
and optimize their social media campaigns so that they achieve the goals
they set. For example, posting at 1:00 p.m. EST on Facebook results in
getting the most shares while posting content at 3:00 p.m. EST results
in getting the most clicks.

A major disadvantage of social media marketing is that brands don't have
complete control over the message. Consumers can freely write comments
that are harmful to a brand's reputation. Amazon's Jeff Bezos famously
wished everyone a "Happy Earth Day" in a tweet that showed him
dogsledding above the Arctic Circle in Norway. He received serious
backlash from Twitter users who pointed out at the time that Amazon
employees were underpaid and overworked.

In addition to losing control over the message, social media marketing
requires a great deal of resources, including time and money. Content is
key to creating engagement, and continuous creation of new and engaging
content requires resources. Social media pages and posts also need to be
monitored for engagement. For example, companies that are active on
social media have a plan for reviewing and replying to sometimes
hundreds of comments. Fortunately, there are great online tools to help
automate replies to comments.

# Facebook {#sect-00005}

Facebook, whose parent company was rebranded as Meta in 2021, is the
largest social media platform, with over 2.9 billion monthly active
users and \$117.92 billion in revenue. These numbers make this platform
attractive for reaching a diverse, global audience. Facebook is facing
the challenge that a growing percentage of its users are baby boomers
(born between 1946 and 1964) while teens are using other platforms, like
TikTok and YouTube, more frequently.

In addition, Facebook has been scrutinized because of how the company
uses personal data. Six in ten social media users report that they've
observed and temporarily believed something they've read on Facebook
that turned out to be false information.

In addition, there's a growing concern about the role that social media
has played in dividing people. Fifty percent of users who are
millennials say that Facebook fosters division, compared to only 38
percent of baby boomers.

Facebook is still clearly the behemoth of social media platforms, and so
long as it holds that position, marketers will continue to use it as a
channel to deliver content and drive engagement with targeted customers.

# Instagram {#sect-00006}

As a social media platform, Instagram's growth has exploded over the
last decade. While not as large as Facebook in terms of users, it still
boasts 1 billion active users every month. Instagram attracts a younger
demographic, mostly people under the age of 30, which makes it
attractive for brands targeting this audience.

The company previously known as Facebook purchased Instagram in 2012.
The union of Facebook and Instagram under one corporate entity has
provided synergistic benefits to users, companies included. First,
social media allows users to cross-post on the two platforms. And
second, this has the advantage of increasing reach and repetition of
messages more efficiently.

From a social media advertising perspective, the integration of Facebook
and Instagram allows companies to manage and monitor campaigns across
the two platforms easily. Furthermore, companies that have leveraged
these integrative features have enjoyed stronger campaign performances
in terms of clicks, views, and website conversions.

Spotify uses Instagram Stories brilliantly during its #yearwrapped
campaign that drops every December. Instagram Stories lets users post
photos and videos that disappear after 24 hours. It's become a very
powerful sharing tool with more than 500 million users posting stories
every day.

Spotify created a special webpage that presents visitors with their most
listened to artists, songs, and other interesting insights related to
their music habits over the year. Spotify gives visitors the option of
sharing these highlights on other social platforms. This campaign has
proved to be highly engaging, with more than 60 million Spotify users
engaging with Spotify's Instagram Story and 3 billion #yearwrapped
playlists streamed as a result of the campaign.

# LinkedIn {#sect-00007}

For business professionals seeking networking, partnership, and
employment opportunities, LinkedIn proves to be an excellent social
media platform (see [\#](#)). LinkedIn boasts 722 million users, who are
known as members. Among social media platforms, LinkedIn is considered
the most trusted, with 73 percent of members agreeing that LinkedIn
protects members' privacy.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

LinkedIn Live is the platform's live streaming feature, which allows
companies to engage directly with community members. Vimeo leveraged the
feature when it held a "Working Lunch" series. Using a seminar format,
it brought together experts across the business, communication, and
technology industries and interested members. The goal was to engage
with the audience, provide relevant information, and drive use and
engagement of the platform.

While not the largest social platform, LinkedIn most certainly serves as
an important tool for connecting with business professionals in the B2B
space.

# Pinterest {#sect-00008}

With 478 million monthly users, Pinterest is a social platform that
allows users to visually explore an endless array of ideas from recipes
to home decor to crafts to personal style. Users can use the platform's
search bar to look for topics or people that interest them, which
produces results related to search keywords.

For businesses, Pinterest offers a host of benefits as a social
marketing tool. First, 97 percent of searches are unbranded. Simply put,
consumers aren't looking for brand-specific content when browsing the
platform. This is music to the ears of companies that can place their
ads in Pinterest feeds near relevant content. For example, a user may
search for "image of vintage running shoes" on Pinterest, which would
result in a host of profiles featuring content related to the search
terms. A well-placed New Balance advertisement featuring its vintage 720
sneaker would be a strategic marketing move in this situation (see
[\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

# Twitter {#sect-00009}

As a social platform, Twitter is a microblogging news and networking
site where users typically post shorter messages known as tweets. After
receiving complaints that 140 characters weren't enough room to express
ideas, Twitter expanded its character limit from 140 to 270 in 2017. It
has approximately 238 million daily active users, with about 14.5
million living in the United States. It has seen steady growth in
international appeal.

Similar to LinkedIn, Twitter is a popular B2B digital marketing tool,
with 67 percent of all B2B businesses using the platform to reach
business customers. Twitter users have a high expectation that a company
will respond to a tweet; therefore, marketers who choose this platform
should be prepared to engage with users directly. Twitter\'s ownership
and policy changes in 2022 led many people and companies to reconsider
their relationship with the platform, but it will likely remain a major
force in marketing and business for years to come.

# Podcasts {#sect-00010}

Podcasts are often free, on-demand, downloadable audio recordings that
cover a variety of topics and are typically made available on a weekly
or monthly basis. Podcasts are distributed through applications such as
Apple's Podcasts, Google Podcasts, Spotify, and Audible, but they can
also be published on a company's website. Podcasting has been growing at
a "hockey stick" rate---200 percent year-on-year growth. Recognizing a
huge opportunity, Spotify acquired podcasting company Megaphone in 2020.
The acquisition positions Spotify as the "go-to" platform for premium
podcast content, which offers new opportunities for advertisers. In a
world where people question information they are given, podcast hosts
stand out because 52 percent of listeners trust advertising when
endorsed by the host. The hosts can offer brand endorsements and
approvals in addition to stories that they bring to life via audio.
Listeners take in what the host says and then build it out in their own
minds. Podcast creators leverage social media platforms to drive traffic
to applications and sites where the podcasts can be played or
downloaded.

Podcasts can be an effective digital marketing tool when marketers want
to hyper target a niche audience with relevant topics. They are
typically created to share educational information and often result in a
good return on investment because of the value they create for loyal
listeners.

eLearning company Harappa Education produces the *Habits Matter*
podcast, which focuses on topics about learning and personal growth.
Listeners are attracted to the series because they want to learn
something new without the noise of a marketing message. Podcasts are
effective at creating value, building relationships, and engaging target
audiences in a subtle way.

:::: {#note-00014 .note}
::: title
Social Media Strategy
:::

Social media marketing can be complex because of the variety of
platforms and new features being added all the time. Check out this
guide from HubSpot on how to [develop a social media strategy](#).

Also, check out the *Habits Matter* podcast. Hosted by Shreyasi Singh,
the *Habits Matter* podcast explores humanity at work. Check it out
[here at Apple](#) or [here at Spotify](#).
::::

## Social Media Marketing: Opportunities and Challenges {#sect-00011}

When marketers are considering social media as a digital marketing tool,
they need to weigh its opportunities and its challenges in order to
determine if it's the right-fit channel for reaching targeted customers.

The major opportunities of social media marketing include reaching
global customers, increasing brand awareness, engaging with targeted
customers, and increasing website traffic. First, social media connects
companies to billions of users across the globe. Because of this reach,
companies can connect with new and existing customers in profitable
ways.

In addition, because of the billions of active users on social media,
brands can increase awareness of their existence with targeted
consumers. For example, a five-year-old swimsuit and beachwear company,
Cupshe, had little to no brand recognition among US consumers until it
launched campaigns on Facebook and Instagram. In 2020, the company
boasted \$150 million in sales without a single storefront. Consumers
were exposed to the brand via social media ads, which then drove them to
the company's website to browse styles and make purchases.

In addition to increasing brand awareness, social platforms help brands
engage directly with consumers. Mass forms of promotion such as
advertising only offer one-way communication from the company to the
customer. Social media platforms allow for multidirectional
communication between the company and users and brand communities.

Finally, social media drives traffic to company websites. Users see a
sponsored advertisement in their news feed that is highly relevant to
their interests and click on the content to learn more, browse
inventory, and, ultimately, make a purchase.

The major challenge facing marketers who use social media to reach
target audiences is that there is a growing distrust of social media
platforms in terms of what they do with our private information. In
addition, social media marketing requires dedicated campaign managers
who can post fresh content frequently, monitor engagement, and respond
to comments. The third disadvantage is that while multidirectional
dialogue between consumers and the company is an advantage, the comments
cannot be controlled. Users can tarnish the company's brand name if they
share negative experiences or opinions about the brand.

:::: {#note-00016 .note}
::: title
What Goes Viral?
:::

Why do some things go viral and others don't? Learn from BuzzFeed's
publisher Dao Nguyen and her TED Talk on the tactics her team uses to
make things go viral.
::::

## Integrated Social Media Marketing {#sect-00012}

Integrated social media marketing involves creating a clear, consistent,
and synergistic message across all social media platforms. When
consumers are presented with coordinated messages across social media
platforms, brand awareness and purchase intention increase.

# Mobile Marketing: Definition and Strategies {#sect-00013}

Mobile marketing is defined as the use of multiple digital marketing
channels that are designed to reach consumers on their smartphones and
tablets. Given the variety of digital tools that marketers use to engage
with consumers, it's important to discuss how mobile device use impacts
digital marketing strategies. Usage of mobile devices to access the
internet and applications has steadily increased over the last ten
years. As mobile device technology and digital technology has improved,
people are doing everything from refinancing their homes to buying cars
online. Mobile device usage will continue to grow, and as consumers
spend more time on mobile devices, marketers must adapt their strategies
to meet consumers where they are.

There are currently 6.4 billion smartphone users worldwide, and usage is
expected to continue to grow over the next decade. In 2022, US mobile
advertising spend is expected to reach \$137.13 billion, where it was
\$100 billion in 2021. Given these compelling statistics, companies must
be prepared with an effective mobile marketing strategy. Marketing for
mobile devices is not the same as marketing for desktops. Consumers
expect a more personalized experience when they engage with brands on
their smartphones.

Elements of a successful mobile marketing strategy should include
responsive design, mobile-friendly emails, app development, and
memorable URLs.

:::: {#note-00020 .note}
::: title
US Mobile Advertising
:::

To learn more about the predicted growth of mobile advertising in the
United States, [read this article from Oberlo](#). It states that US
spend is expected to grow 14 percent to \$156 billion in 2023 and up to
\$174 billion in 2024.
::::

## Responsive Web Design {#sect-00014}

Responsive web design means that when people visit your website via
their mobile device, the menus and content display in a way that is easy
to read and engage with. Users don't need to pinch, expand, or scroll
the screen to view content. Responsive web design became the standard in
2015 when Google announced that mobile-friendly websites would be
prioritized over non-mobile-friendly designs in search results.
Responsive web design is critical to ensuring that visitors have a good
experience while navigating your website.

## Mobile-Friendly Emails {#sect-00015}

Mobile-friendly emails are emails whose images, text, and links display
in a user-friendly way when accessed via a mobile device. With 68
percent of emails being opened on mobile devices, responsive design is
necessary to create a good user experience. Similar to responsive web
design, email content needs to display on mobile devices in a way that
is simple for the user to consume.

One way that email marketers can meet mobile-friendly standards is to
ensure that subject lines are between 41 and 50 characters. Subject
lines should capture attention and paint a benefit for the subscriber.
In addition, mobile-friendly emails often contain a pre-header, which is
the first line of text in your email. It provides context for what the
email contains. Finally, emails should be concise with a clear and
easy-to-find call to action. Many emails contain buttons that link email
viewers directly to the company's website. The button is typically
rectangular and includes actionable language like "Get Started" or "Shop
the Sale."

## Developing an App {#sect-00016}

For some companies, developing a mobile app is an important element in
their mobile strategy. Because a shocking 90 percent of people's mobile
usage is on smartphone apps, marketers must consider the value in
creating one.

One benefit of developing a mobile app is that apps provide direct
communication and engagement opportunities with customers at the touch
of a button. Amazon's app, for example, makes it easy to search for and
purchase products from mobile devices. The alternative is for users to
open their browser on their phone, type in the Amazon URL, and search
directly from the mobile site. Apps make it convenient for consumers.

## Short/Memorable URLs {#sect-00017}

An internet site's address on the web is technically known as a uniform
resource locator (URL). In the digital world, you could have a great
website with great content and a strong social media presence, but
visitors cannot reach your website without a well-constructed URL.

Having a shorter, memorable URL is an important marketing tactic for the
following reasons. First, it's easy for people to remember. Second,
shorter URLs are easier to share, whether it's through email, text, or
social media. Finally, optimizing the length of a URL makes it much
easier for Google to find and display in search results.

There are a number of applications, such as TinyURL and Bitly, that are
capable of turning long URLs into shorter ones; however, the jury is
still out on whether search engines perceive these URLs as trustworthy.

## Mobile Marketing: Opportunities and Challenges {#sect-00018}

Mobile marketing presents clear opportunities for digital marketers.
First, mobile device usage continues to grow as consumers stratify their
time across various devices at once. In addition, mobile devices allow
people to experience almost constant connectivity that ignores the
boundaries that traditional marketing channels must observe, such as
time and place. For example, Nothing Bundt Cakes' store hours of
operation might be 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. However, accessing its
website to place an order can happen at any time of day from any
location.

The shift in mobile usage behavior provides a number of opportunities
for marketers to connect with consumers in a place where they are
spending more and more time. Additionally, consumers are using mobile
devices to conduct product research, view customer reviews, and interact
with brands on social media platforms.

In addition to mobile marketing opportunities, this channel also
presents challenges to digital marketers. The first challenge is finding
the right mix of mobile channels to reach your target audience. For some
companies, SMS texting makes sense because customers are open to
receiving promotional messages via text. If the company has a mobile
application, it may consider sending push notifications that alert users
to important information when they aren't engaging with the app.
Understanding your target audience is key to determining which mobile
tools make the most sense.

A second challenge with mobile marketing is measuring results. While
companies can easily measure things like in-app purchases and emails
opened and clicked, it's more difficult for marketers to see whether
someone has seen a push notification or in-app message.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00019}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

:::: {#note-00023 .note}
::: title
*National Geographic*
:::

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

*National Geographic* has over 220 million followers on Instagram,
boasting the leading brand account on the site. It shares stunning
images of people, places, animals, and natural landscapes from all over
the world. As a visual storyteller, *National Geographic* captures some
of the most awe-inspiring, unfiltered images that the world has ever
seen (see [\#](#)).

Instagram has served as an effective vehicle for sharing these images
globally. *National Geographic* has utilized the platform to drive
engagement with followers. Its famous "Wanderlust" social media campaign
invites amateur photographers from around the world to post the best
photographs they've taken while traveling. Followers use the
#wanderlustcontest hashtag to connect with the *National Geographic*
community of travelers. Its strategy to promote user-generated content
was a great way to connect with followers and build continuous
engagement.

In addition to its Wanderlust campaign, *National Geographic* uses
Instagram and other social media platforms to share content that is
central to the brand's values. For example, on "The Endangered Species
Day" and "The Oceans Day," it pushes content related to wildlife and
nature protection using powerful images and statistics.

Through social media, *National Geographic* is able to share its passion
for nature and wildlife with a community of like-minded people. As a
tool, social media allows *National Geographic* to engage with followers
in a personal way.
::::

# Endnotes {#sect-00020}

:::: {#rf-013 .note}
::: title
:::

13\.

Chris Matyszczyk, "Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos Showed Off His Exciting
Vacation on Twitter. What Happened Next Wasn't Pretty,"

Inc.

, April 23, 2018,
https://www.inc.com/chris-matyszczyk/amazon-ceo-jeff-bezos-showed-off-his-exciting-vacation-on-twitter-what-happened-next-wasnt-pretty.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-014 .note}
::: title
:::

14\.

Mansoor Iqbal, "Facebook Revenue and Usage Statistics (2022)," App Data,
Business of Apps, updated January 19, 2022,
https://www.businessofapps.com/data/facebook-statistics.
::::

:::: {#rf-015 .note}
::: title
:::

15\.

Chris Raymond, "So What Do You Think of Facebook Now?," Consumer
Reports, March 15, 2019,
https://www.consumerreports.org/social-media/what-do-you-think-of-facebook-now-survey/.
::::

:::: {#rf-016 .note}
::: title
:::

16\.

Raymond, "What Do You Think?"
::::

:::: {#rf-017 .note}
::: title
:::

17\.

Dominique Jackson, "Instagram vs. Facebook: Which Is Best for Your
Brand's Strategy?,"

Sprout Blog

, Sprout Social, June 30, 2019,
https://sproutsocial.com/insights/instagram-vs-facebook/.
::::

:::: {#rf-018 .note}
::: title
:::

18\.

Christina Newberry, "38 LinkedIn Statistics Marketers Should Know in
2021," Hootsuite, January 12, 2021,
https://blog.hootsuite.com/linkedin-statistics-business.
::::

:::: {#rf-019 .note}
::: title
:::

19\.

"All about Pinterest," Pinterest Help, Pinterest, accessed February 13,
2022, https://help.pinterest.com/en/guide/all-about-pinterest.
::::

:::: {#rf-020 .note}
::: title
:::

20\.

"Pinterest Demographics: Find Your Audience," Pinterest Business,
Pinterest, accessed February 13, 2022,
https://business.pinterest.com/en/audience/.
::::

:::: {#rf-021 .note}
::: title
:::

21\.

"Number of Monetizable Daily Active Twitter Users (mDAU) Worldwide from
1st Quarter 2017 to 3rd Quarter 2021," Statista, accessed February 13,
2022,
https://www.statista.com/statistics/970920/monetizable-daily-active-twitter-users-worldwide/.
::::

:::: {#rf-022 .note}
::: title
:::

22\.

Ying Lin, "10 Twitter Statistics Every Marketer Should Know in 2021
(Infographic),"

Oberlo Blog

, Oberlo, January 25, 2021,
https://www.oberlo.com/blog/twitter-statistics.
::::

:::: {#rf-023 .note}
::: title
:::

23\.

Damian Radcliffe, "Why Podcasting Is on the Rise: 8 Trends Publishers
Cannot Ignore," What's New in Publishing, last modified December 17,
2020,
https://whatsnewinpublishing.com/why-podcasting-is-on-the-rise-8-trends-publishers-cannot-ignore/.
::::

:::: {#rf-024 .note}
::: title
:::

24\.

"How Spotify Is Strengthening Our Investment in Podcast Advertising with
Acquisition of Megaphone," For the Record, Spotify, November 10, 2020,
https://newsroom.spotify.com/2020-11-10/how-spotify-is-strengthening-our-investment-in-podcast-advertising-with-acquisition-of-megaphone/.
::::

:::: {#rf-025 .note}
::: title
:::

25\.

"Podcasts and the Next Level of Influence," Spotify Advertising,
Spotify, March 2019,
https://ads.spotify.com/en-US/news-and-insights/podcasts-and-the-next-level-of-influence/.
::::

:::: {#rf-026 .note}
::: title
:::

26\.

Maile McCann, "How Cupshe Built a \$150 Million Swimwear Business by
Embracing Both DTC and Amazon," Modern Retail, Digiday Media, August 30,
2021,
https://www.modernretail.co/startups/how-cupshe-built-a-150-million-swimwear-business-by-embracing-both-dtc-and-amazon/.
::::

:::: {#rf-027 .note}
::: title
:::

27\.

Ashley Wilson, "Top Mobile Marketing Challenges and How to Overcome
Them,"

CRM and Technology Blog

, Technology Advisors, June 30, 2021,
https://www.techadv.com/blog/top-mobile-marketing-challenges-and-how-overcome-them.
::::

:::: {#rf-028 .note}
::: title
:::

28\.

Kateryna Hanko, "35+ Must-Know Phone Usage Statistics for 2022,"

Clario Blog

, Clario Tech, April 8, 2022,
https://clario.co/blog/phone-usage-statistics/.
::::

:::: {#rf-029 .note}
::: title
:::

29\.

"US Mobile Advertising Growth (2019--2024)," Statistics Library, Oberlo,
updated February 2022,
https://www.oberlo.com/statistics/mobile-advertising-growth.
::::

:::: {#rf-030 .note}
::: title
:::

30\.

"7 Essential Tips to Creating Mobile Friendly Emails,"

The Digital and Email Marketing Blog

, Campaign Monitor, May 21, 2019,
https://www.campaignmonitor.com/blog/email-marketing/mobile-friendly-email-tips/.
::::

:::: {#rf-031 .note}
::: title
:::

31\.

Pietro Saccomani, "People Spent 90% of Their Mobile Time Using Apps in
2021,"

Mobiloud Blog

, MobiLoud, last modified March 1, 2022,
https://www.mobiloud.com/blog/mobile-apps-vs-mobile-websites.
::::

:::: {#rf-032 .note}
::: title
:::

32\.

"National Geographic's Instagram Accounts Reach 200 Million Followers,"
National Geographic Partners, May 28, 2020,
https://nationalgeographicpartners.com/2020/05/nat-geo-instagram-accounts-near-200-million-followers/.
::::

:::: {#rf-033 .note}
::: title
:::

33\.

Tasmin Oxford, "National Geographic Inspires Wanderlust with Its Latest
UGC Campaign," Marketing, Reuters Events, September 17, 2015,
https://www.reutersevents.com/marketing/brand-marketing/national-geographic-inspires-wanderlust-its-latest-ugc-campaign.
::::

:::: {#rf-034 .note}
::: title
:::

34\.

Nat Geo Wild (@natgeowild), "Today is #EndangeredSpeciesDay. Every year
on the third Friday in May, #ESDay recognizes and support national
efforts to protect our #endangeredspecies," Instagram photo, May 15,
2015, https://www.instagram.com/p/2uQN2swzXH/.
::::

# 

integrated social media marketing

involves creating a clear, consistent, and synergistic message across
all social media platforms

mobile-friendly emails

emails whose images, text, and links display in a way that is easy to
read when accessed via a mobile device

mobile marketing

using multiple digital marketing channels that are designed to reach
consumers on their smartphones and tablets

podcasts

often free, on-demand, downloadable audio recordings that cover a
variety of topics and are typically made available on a weekly or
monthly basis

responsive web design

designing a website that is configured to adapt to any device, making it
easy for visitors to read and interact with its features

social media marketing

using social media platforms, such as Facebook, Instagram, LinkedIn, and
Twitter, to deliver content that drives engagement with your brand
