m00107

74872890-be5d-4ea0-b696-5d01eacd9ece

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Discuss the role of marketing metrics in digital, online, social media,
and mobile marketing.

List and describe the metrics used to evaluate the success of online
marketing.

# Types of Online Marketing Metrics {#sect-00002}

While online marketing tools have numerous advantages over traditional
tools, it's important for marketers to pay close attention to metrics
that indicate the performance of their online marketing campaigns.
Metrics are goals that marketers are trying to reach through their
campaigns, and they are typically quantitative in nature. For example,
companies measure the performance of their social media campaigns by
measuring how many likes, shares, or comments are posted in response to
the content. While each online marketing tool has its own set of
metrics, we'll focus on the following tools.

## Website Traffic {#sect-00003}

Website traffic is the total number of visitors to a company's website.
For some companies, website traffic can help move consumers further
along the sales funnel and closer to making a purchase. A sales funnel
is a visual representation of the customer journey from product
awareness to product purchase. For e-commerce sites specifically, online
marketers want to increase traffic to their website, which represents
the top of the sales funnel, where most consumers will stop. The number
of consumers will eventually dwindle until there is an actual purchase,
which represents the narrow, lower part of the funnel (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

## Traffic by Source {#sect-00004}

Monitoring website traffic by source means paying attention to the site
from which the website traffic came. For example, social media is famous
for generating traffic to companies' websites. Online marketers can
track this information by attaching a piece of tracking code to links on
social media pages and other sources to assess where the visitor came
from. In addition to social media, traffic sources can be email, paid
search, organic search, paid social, and affiliates.

Paid search is a type of digital advertising where marketers pay search
engines like Google and Bing to place their ads in sponsored spots at
the top or bottom of a search engine results page (SERP). A SERP (Search
Engine Results Pages) is the list of search results that displays on a
search engine's page after someone enters key search terms into a search
query box. Say, for example, a consumer is looking for a local company
to investigate and fix a leak in their ceiling. That customer would
likely visit Google and type in the search terms "plumbers near me."
Google then displays the SERP featuring sponsored companies in top
positions on the page. Companies bid on key search terms like "fix leaky
roof" in an auction with competitors. If their bid is high enough, they
will secure a top position on Google's search results page. In turn,
when users click on that sponsored add, they are directed to the
company's website or landing page.

Organic search refers to the list of websites on a search results page
that have not been paid for by marketers. Search engines use algorithms
to deliver search results that are relevant to the key search terms that
a visitor has entered. When someone is searching for a local plumber on
Google and they click on an organic search listing, the company that
appears organically in those search results does not pay for the traffic
that visits its website.

Paid social is similar to paid search in that marketers pay social media
companies to display sponsored digital advertisements to targeted
customers on their platform. Social media users who click on a sponsored
social advertisement are then directed to the company's website or
landing page.

Affiliates are people or companies that earn a commission for driving
traffic to another person's or company's website where they make a
purchase. CJ Affiliate, formerly known as Commission Junction, provides
affiliate marketers with a marketplace to connect with brands who pay
affiliates for driving traffic and purchases online.

## Conversions {#sect-00005}

Simply put, conversions happen when a company turns a visitor into a
customer. When a consumer purchases a LEGO set on the company's website,
that's a conversion. When a new user signs up for TikTok, that's a
conversion. Conversions are important in measuring the success of online
marketing campaigns and the consumers' purchase experience.

## Bounce Rate {#sect-00006}

Bounce rate is a metric that online marketers use to measure what
percentage of visitors visit the site, view one page, and then leave.
Bounce rates can be examined for each page of your website. Online
marketers want to aim for a bounce rate that is lower than 40 percent.
Higher bounce rates indicate issues with pages, including the time it
takes for them to load in a visitor's browser.

## Search Trends {#sect-00007}

Search trends are data points that indicate how frequently a term is
searched. Researching search trends provides insight into who a
company's customers are and what they are currently interested in.
Google Trends is a free tool that online marketers can use to gather
this information. Monitoring search trends has some predictive benefits
to online marketers, who can recommend changes to products, advertising,
and budgeting based on what consumers are searching for. For example,
marketers utilize keyword tools offered by companies like Semrush to
gain insights into customer search activity. Semrush provides customers
with information on the value of popular search terms.

## New versus Returning Visitors {#sect-00008}

New visitors, or new users, are people who are just learning about your
website. A new visitor is someone who is visiting your website for the
first time. Returning visitors are visitors or users who have been to
your website before. Analyzing new and returning user metrics provides
online marketers with a sense of how effective the company is in
attracting new visitors compared to returning visitors. If there's an
increase in new visitors, online marketers may be able to conclude that
they are successfully attracting new customers via the online marketing
tools they are using.

## Average Session Duration {#sect-00009}

A session is defined as a collection of interactions that occur on a
company's website. For example, if someone searches for Nike soccer
cleats on Google, they'll likely click on a landing page that takes them
to the Nike website's page related to soccer footwear. While on the
page, the visitor may then click to browse different styles and colors
and maybe watch a video of a famous athlete playing in the cleats. The
visitor may then decide to make a purchase by selecting their size and
clicking on a CTA (call-to-action) button such as "Add to Cart." This
collection of activities equates to a session. Online marketers examine
session duration as a way to measure engagement. If someone visits your
shopping cart page after adding an item but then leaves within a few
seconds (known as shopping cart abandonment), that may indicate issues
with that page.

## Page Views {#sect-00010}

Page views is a metric related to how many total pages have been viewed
on your website. Websites typically have a home page, which is where
visitors land when they type in your main URL. But depending on the
company, its website could have many pages in addition to the home page.
For example, e-commerce sites have pages that allow visitors to browse
products. There might be review pages for each product and pages
dedicated to blogs or articles about featured products. There's likely
to be a customer support page and a terms and conditions page. The
possibilities are almost endless. Online marketers use page views as a
metric to gauge the success of their website pages.

## Most Visited Pages {#sect-00011}

In analyzing page views, online marketers can gain important insights,
such as which pages are most visited. If they identify content on their
website that attracts a larger number of views, they can attribute those
page views to a traffic source, such as social media or a blog.

## Social Engagement {#sect-00012}

Social engagement relates to the number of actions that social media
users take in direct relation to your company, brand, or product. Social
engagement can be measured by the number of likes, shares, retweets, and
comments made by account followers.

## Click-Through Rate {#sect-00013}

When users visit Google and begin searching for something they are
interested in, Google returns what are called search results. This is
the list of solutions or answers to the search terms a user entered in
the Google search bar. Some companies pay to appear at the very top of
that search results page. As noted above, this is known as paid search.
When users see the ad, this is known as an impression. The click-through
rate (CTR) is the percentage of people who click on your ad. Measuring
CTR indicates how successful their search advertisement is in attracting
users to click. The ads are linked to a landing page, where the consumer
is presented with additional information that is designed to lead them
to a purchase. A high CTR leads to more traffic and ultimately
conversions.

## Cost per Click {#sect-00014}

Search engines like Google and Bing generate revenue by charging
companies that pay for search ads to appear on search result pages. The
cost per click (CPC) is the cost companies pay search engines for each
click that a search advertisement receives. This cost is based on the
keywords that a company bids on. Simply put, there are competitors in
the auction who are willing to pay a certain amount to appear on the
search results page when a user enters certain keywords. Depending on
how competitive the auction is, CPC can fluctuate, and online marketers
analyze CPC to ensure they don't overpay to have their search ads
display.

Let's suppose that you wanted to purchase a Tampa Bay NFL jersey. You
are interested in finding one at the lowest price possible. You're also
interested in the team's home jersey. You may type in the search engine
bar: Tampa Jersey in white. Retailers like Fanatics and NFLshop.com will
appear at the top of the search results page next to the word "Ad." If
NFLshop.com appears first, it won the auction over the search keywords
you entered.

Online marketers set limits on how much they are willing to bid on
certain keywords. If they bid too low, they lose the auction and may not
get the impressions they need. If they bid too high, they risk
overpaying for their search advertising. They should identify their
goals and bid accordingly.

## Cost per Acquisition {#sect-00015}

Cost per acquisition (CPA) is also known as cost per action or cost per
conversion. It relates to the aggregate or cumulative cost of acquiring
a customer. CPA can be measured by channel or campaign. The conversion
could be a sale, a form completion, or a click.

The CPA formula is:

$${Cost}{per}{Acquisiton}{(CPA)} = \frac{{Dollars}{Spent}{on}{Campaign}}{{Number}{of}{Conversions}}$$

For example, let's look at CPA for a paid search campaign. Fanatics uses
paid search to reach customers interested in buying athletic apparel.
Let's assume that Fanatics runs a search campaign for one month that
costs the company \$20,000. The campaign was responsible for driving
over 1 million visits to the website and 32,000 conversions. 32,000
conversions at \$20,000 would result in a CPA of \$0.63, meaning that
each customer conversion cost the company \$0.63.

$${Cost}{per}{Acquisiton}{(CPA)} = \frac{\$ 20,000}{32,000} = \$ 0.63$$

This calculation can be somewhat misleading, however, because it fails
to account for the resources spent creating the ad and managing the
search campaign. Nevertheless, online marketers monitor CPA because it
helps them measure the effectiveness of their online marketing
strategies. The lower the CPA, the more effective the campaign.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
Targeted Advertising
:::

As a consumer, have you ever wondered why you see certain advertisements
on social media but not others? The answer is targeted advertising.
Targeted advertising allows marketing professionals to specify a target
audience of their choosing. For example, you may see advertisements for
winter boots if you have recently initiated a search with those terms.
At the same time, a friend might see advertisements for winter tires for
the same reason.

Targeted advertising can be expensive because it is tailored to a
marketer's exact specifications. Therefore, marketing professionals
calculate the cost every time a prospective customer clicks on a
targeted ad through their website. This cost-per-click metric shows us
how much the marketing professional pays every time a prospect clicks on
an ad.

Cost per click has a role in search engine marketing as well. For
example, if our advertisement is served up on a search engine results
page (SERP) and a prospective customer clicks on that advertisement, the
marketing team must pay the search provider.

As savvy marketers, we know that not every click results in a purchase.
So, we have to be careful not to invest more in clicks than our
profitability allows. We also need to consider the average revenue and
profit per order and the customer lifetime value when determining the
efficacy of a targeted advertising campaign.

The formula for cost per click is the total cost for the digital
campaign/number of clicks.

$${Cost}~{per}~{Click} = \frac{{Total}~{Cost}~{of}~{Digital}~{Campaign}}{{Number}~{of}~{Clicks}}$$

*Give the cost-per-click calculation a try for yourself. What is the
cost per click of each of the four campaigns for a pet store?*

  *Campaign*     *Total Campaign Cost*   *Number of Clicks*
  -------------- ----------------------- --------------------
  Dog Food       \$12,000                18,100 clicks
  Cat Food       \$10,000                20,200 clicks
  Aquariums      \$7,000                 19,050 clicks
  Bird Feeders   \$5,500                 5,000 clicks

Dog food: \$0.66/click

Cat food: \$0.50/click

Aquariums: \$0.37/click

Bird feeders: \$1.10/click

*What additional information would we need to know to determine whether
the cost per click for each product is a good investment?*

Average revenue and profit per order, percentage of people who click
through who make a purchase, and/or customer lifetime value

*Let's suppose that Najja found our pet store website on a targeted ad,
clicked through, and placed a \$70 order for bird feeders that had a 10
percent profit margin for our pet store. Was the click-through rate a
good investment?*

Yes. The pet store profited \$7 on the single purchase at a
click-through rate of just \$1.10. In addition, Najja may purchase more
in the future, making the click-through rate an even better investment.
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00016}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# 

affiliates

people or companies that earn a commission for driving traffic to
another person's or company's website where they make a purchase

bounce rate

a metric that online marketers use to measure what percentage of
visitors who visit the site, view one page, and then leave

click-through rate (CTR)

the percentage of people who click on an online ad

conversions

happen when a company turns a visitor into a customer

cost per acquisition (CPA)

also known as cost per action or cost per conversion, relates to the
aggregate or cumulative cost of acquiring a customer and can be measured
by channel or campaign

cost per click (CPC)

the cost companies pay search engines for each click that a search
advertisement receives, which is based on the keywords a company bids on

impression

when users see an online ad

new visitors

people who are first visiting your website, also known as new users

organic search

the list of websites on a search engine results page that have not been
paid for by marketers

page views

a metric related to how many total pages have been viewed on your
website

paid search

a type of digital advertising where marketers pay search engines like
Google and Bing to place their ads in sponsored spots at the top or
bottom of a search results page

paid social

a type of digital marketing advertising where a company pays a social
media company to display a digital advertisement to targeted customers
on its platform

returning visitors

visitors or users who have been to your website before

sales funnel

a visual representation of the customer journey from product awareness
to product purchase

search trends

data points that indicate how frequently a term is searched

SERP (Search Engine Results Page)

the list of search results that displays on a search engine's page after
someone enters key search terms into a search query box

session

a collection of interactions that occur on a company's website

social engagement

relates to the number of actions that social media users take in direct
relation to your company, brand, or product

traffic by source

means paying attention to the site from which the website traffic came

website traffic

the total number of visitors to a company's website
