m00108

c3368c74-f526-4743-ae6b-6e1f064e93e1

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Describe ethical issues with respect to digital marketing and social
media.

Explain why ethical issues exist.

# Privacy, Transparency, and Awareness {#sect-00002}

While digital marketing tools and social media provide online marketers
with effective ways to engage with customers, build relationships, and
drive consumers toward a purchase, there are ethical issues that
marketers must consider when utilizing these tools.

First, because of the highly targeted capabilities of digital and social
media, companies have access to large amounts of personal data,
including name, email address, phone number, as well as personal
interests, social and political views, and shopping behavior. Consumers
are increasingly concerned about data privacy. In a recent survey by
KPMG, 86 percent of the respondents have a growing concern about data
privacy, and 78 percent fear the amount of data being collected.

Given this growth in distrust of how personal data is handled, some
companies have responded with updated policies designed to be more
transparent about how data will be used. Seventy-five percent of
consumers polled reported that they want increased transparency.

In 2021, Apple released features for iPhone and iPad users that allow
consumers to have stronger control of how their data is used. Using
pop-ups, Apple device users will be able to allow or disallow companies
to track their activity across apps and the websites they link to. This
move by Apple resulted in some back-and-forth commentary by Meta's Mark
Zuckerberg and Apple CEO Tim Cook. Tech companies like Facebook and
Google depend on being able to target the advertising on their
applications to users using personal data. Giving greater privacy
control to iPhone users presents a threat to the core of their business
models.

Social media platforms in particular mine personal data and then use it
to sell advertising space on news feeds of consumers who match the
demographics and psychographics of a company's target market. With
nearly 71 percent of social media users taking the time to check their
privacy settings on social media, it's clear that this issue is front
and center for a majority of users. Companies can respect the privacy of
their users by being transparent about what data they collect and how
they use it.

# Tracking Consumer Data {#sect-00003}

The reality is that it's not just social media companies and search
engines that track consumer data. A majority of companies use tracking
codes to follow consumers and data about them as they navigate the web.
Zoho, a productivity and collaboration app, reported that in the B2B
space, about 72 percent of businesses do not inform customers that they
are being tracked by third parties.

# The Use of Client Reviews {#sect-00004}

Client reviews involve feedback that a customer or client posts directly
to a platform that can accessed by consumers during the buying process.
Companies that use client or customer reviews include Amazon.com,
Wayfair, and Lands' End. Customers rate their experience with the
product typically by assigning stars and commenting on their
satisfaction.

Reviews can be helpful to consumers during the search phase of the
buying process because reviews provide a real-world glimpse into the
favorability of a product. For example, Wayfair invites customers to
post pictures of items like sofas and end tables once a customer has
styled the room. This provides shoppers a real-life view of the product,
its color, and its size, among other things.

Beyond the reviews on e-commerce sites, Google serves as a major player
in the customer review space. Consumers often rely on Google reviews
when deciding on whether to hire a local business. In addition to
Google, consumers can find reviews for travel on Tripadvisor, restaurant
reviews on Zomato, and reviews of software programs on G2.

Marketers recognize the power of customer reviews as a digital
promotional tool, as consumers report that they perceive reviews as more
credible than messages created by the company itself.

:::: {#note-00006 .note}
::: title
Apple's Taking Big Steps to Protect Privacy
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

In January 2022, Apple took one of its most impactful steps toward
protecting the privacy of iCloud users, the iCloud Private Relay (see
[\#](#)). When enabled on Apple devices, this feature hides a user's IP
address from the websites they visit, essentially masking a user's
entire online footprint.

The privacy feature is a game changer in the digital marketing space, as
companies like Meta and Google depend on seeing a consumer's online
journey to learn more about who they are and what interests they have.
Tracking online activity allows companies to serve users with relevant
marketing messages and offerings.

In addition to the privacy relay, Apple also released "Hide My Email,"
which allows Apple device users to enter a unique email address on
websites without sharing their actual email address. Emails that are
sent to a randomly generated address are then forwarded to a user's
inbox, thereby hiding a user's actual email address.

Finally, Apple has updated its Mail app such that it prevents marketers
from tracking whether or not someone has opened an email. Email
marketers measure the percentage of people who open marketing emails to
determine their level of engagement and the effectiveness of the email.

Apple appears to be taking consumer privacy to another level. By
offering a collection of privacy-centric features, it is equipping
consumers with tools to protect their personal information and navigate
the web unseen.

Check out Apple's website to [learn more about iCloud Private Relay](#).
Also [read about it in this *Wired* article](#).
::::

#  {#sect-00005}

Direct, online, and social media marketing include a mix of useful tools
that help marketers engage with targeted consumers in a way that is
personalized and is designed to drive the audience to follow through on
the desired marketing action. With the explosion in internet and mobile
device usage coupled with advancements in digital technology, online
marketing tools have been developed to help marketers meet consumers in
the digital space. These tools are capable of connecting online
marketers to carefully targeted individuals. With the development of
these tools come ethical issues related to privacy. As consumer concern
for privacy protection grows, companies will need to adapt their privacy
policies to be more transparent about how they use consumer data.

#  {#sect-00006}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00007}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00008}

Goal-setting is the development of an action plan designed to motivate
and guide an individual, group, or organization to reach a goal. There
are several models of goal setting; one of the popular ones is SMART
goal-setting. SMART stands for goals that are specific, measurable,
action-oriented, realistic, and time-bound.

Consider a goal you might set for yourself that's SMART. For example, if
your goal is to intern at a marketing firm ,you might establish the
following SMART goals:

Specific: Create a list of possible companies you want to target for an
internship, and indicate why.

Measurable: Quantify the number of contacts at each company you plan to
make in a week, and map those to calendar dates.

Action-oriented: Develop a plan for reaching out to and making
appointments with those contacts.

Realistic: Is what you're setting reasonable when you consider your work
schedule, schoolwork, personal responsibilities, etc.? Set goals that
are achievable.

Time-bound: Consider all of the steps, and decide how much time it will
take you to complete this goal.

Now set yourself two goals around building your personal brand. Is there
a skill you wish to learn or a website you want to develop? Whatever
your goals are, be sure to consider the SMART goal-setting model as you
develop them.

#  {#sect-00009}

Check out [the Association of National Advertisers (ANA) website](#),
and scan the wealth of information available. It offers a content
library, newsstand, marketing futures, blogs, and podcasts. Throughout
this information, you will learn more about many aspects of current
trends, future opportunities, and simply what it is that marketers are
doing now. Being educated on the many associations and the information
available can inspire you to look at marketing careers in a different
light.

Navigate to the Content Library, then the Media Channels section. (In
order to see the link to the Content Library, you need to hover over
"Resources" at the top of the page.) From this section, review the
various pieces of content available, and choose one to read. After
reading, write a two-paragraph summary on what you learned, what you
found most interesting, and why.

#  {#sect-00010}

## Publix {#sect-00011}

Founded in 1930, supermarket chain Publix started with one store in
Winter Haven, Florida. It now has over 1,200 stores throughout the
Southeast. The company was founded on the promise of superior customer
service. With unwavering dedication to quality and value, Publix is now
one of the 10 largest-volume supermarket chains in the country.

Publix is employee-owned, and the pride and dedication of its employees
shows in the daily interactions with customers and the communities it
serves. Walk into any Publix grocery store, and the spacious aisles and
displays provide for ease and access. The brightly lit shelves and soft
music make for a pleasant shopping experience. With a wide selection of
quality products and its own Publix brand, customers are typically
delighted with the availability of premium and well-priced items.

A hallmark of the Publix shopping experience is the checkout. Its
friendly Publix cashiers and abundance of grocery baggers make shopping
a pleasure. No matter how big or small an order might be, the baggers
are always eager to help customers out to the car with their groceries.

As the company worked to develop the superior in-store shopping
experience, consumer preferences for grocery shopping began to change.
Amazon, a leader in online shopping, bought Whole Foods. Adding to its
already "everything store" approach, Amazon was now able to deliver
groceries within a two-hour window.

In 2016, Publix began a pilot with Instacart. Instacart is an online
ordering and delivery platform, partnering primarily with grocery and
drugstore chains nationwide. Publix had plans in place to launch
Instacart with all Publix locations by 2020.

When COVID-19 began raging throughout the United States and economies
were shuttered, demand for grocery delivery was high. Publix and
Instacart rallied to meet the need. Each Publix location was tasked with
getting its merchandise uploaded on its website, and Instacart was
quickly hiring employees to shop for and deliver groceries to homes
across its market area.

Using a mobile app, Publix consumers continue to use Instacart to shop
for grocery delivery. Through the robust Publix website, consumers are
able to place orders for party trays, bakery items, and whole-meal
catering solutions. Publix regularly posts updates on food recalls and
highlights of its sustainability efforts. Consumers who opt in can join
the Publix Club to receive emails with coupons and weekly discounts on
groceries.

Publix has an active social media presence. With over 3 million Facebook
followers, loyal consumers often comment on their good finds, grocery
deals, and favorite products. Publix provides its followers with
favorite recipes and new products.

Through Instagram, Publix shares photos of some of its food products as
well as ways it supports its communities and helps with environmental
sustainability issues. Customers regularly like and comment on the
Instagram posts featuring Publix food items and holiday meal ideas.

To learn more about these companies, [visit the Publix website](#) and
[the Instacart website](#).

## Case Questions {#sect-00012}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00013}

:::: {#rf-035 .note}
::: title
:::

35\.

Lance Whitney, "Data Privacy Is a Growing Concern for More Consumers,"
TechRepublic, TechnologyAdvice, August 17, 2021,
https://www.techrepublic.com/article/data-privacy-is-a-growing-concern-for-more-consumers/.
::::

:::: {#rf-036 .note}
::: title
:::

36\.

Whitney, "Data Privacy."
::::

:::: {#rf-037 .note}
::: title
:::

37\.

David Price, "iOS 15 Latest Version, Problems & New Features for
iPhones,"

Macworld

, August 18, 2022,
https://www.macworld.com/article/675711/ios-15-latest-version-problems-new-features-for-iphone.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-038 .note}
::: title
:::

38\.

Peter Suciu, "There Isn't Enough Privacy on Social Media and That Is a
Real Problem,"

Forbes

, June 26, 2020,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/petersuciu/2020/06/26/there-isnt-enough-privacy-on-social-media-and-that-is-a-real-problem/.
::::

:::: {#rf-039 .note}
::: title
:::

39\.

"Zoho Privacy Survey Finds 62% of Businesses Aren't Telling Customers
about Third-Party Ad Trackers Collecting Their Data," Business Wire,
December 15, 2020,
https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20201215005426/en/Zoho-Privacy-Survey-Finds-62-of-Businesses-Aren%E2%80%99t-Telling-Customers-About-Third-Party-Ad-Trackers-Collecting-Their-Data.
::::

:::: {#rf-040 .note}
::: title
:::

40\.

"About iCloud Private Relay," Apple Support, Apple, July 11, 2022,
https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT212614.
::::

:::: {#rf-041 .note}
::: title
:::

41\.

"What Is Hide My Email?," Apple Support, Apple, January 31, 2022,
https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT210425.
::::

:::: {#rf-042 .note}
::: title
:::

42\.

Rob Kaczanowski, "How Apple's Mail Privacy Changes Affect Email Open
Tracking,"

Postmark Blog

, Postmark, November 9, 2021,
https://postmarkapp.com/blog/how-apples-mail-privacy-changes-affect-email-open-tracking.
::::

:::: {#rf-043 .note}
::: title
:::

43\.

Mike Miller, "Publix Supermarket Makes Shopping and Road Tripping a
Pleasure," Florida Back Roads Travel, March 24, 2022,
https://www.florida-backroads-travel.com/publix-supermarket.html; Todd
Jones, "A Message about Coronavirus (VOVID-19) from Publix CEO Todd
Jones," Publix Press Release,
https://corporate.publix.com/newsroom/news-stories/covid-19-message-from-ceo;
Russell Redman, "Publix Rolls Out 15-Minute Grocery Delivery via
Instacart," SN Supermarket News, April 28, 2022,
https://www.supermarketnews.com/online-retail/publix-rolls-out-15-minute-grocery-delivery-instacart
::::

# 

client reviews

involve feedback that a customer or client posts directly to a platform
that can accessed by consumers during the buying process
