m00038

f64a458a-07be-4711-b7a6-5a584c833a20

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Starbucks is no stranger to the global marketplace. In 2020, the
Seattle-based coffee company had over 30,000 stores in 80 countries.
Each fall, Starbucks's United States--based fans anticipate the release
of the Pumpkin Spice Latte (or PSL, as it has come to be known). But
what about other countries?

In 2021, the Starbucks Pumpkin Spice Latte was made available in stores
across Europe, the Middle East, and Africa. But the advertisements and
the specific Pumpkin Spice Latte formula were modified from what you see
in the United States because they were specifically crafted for each of
the company's global markets. For example, in Portugal, the iced version
of the Pumpkin Spice Latte is more popular, so it is marketed more
heavily than the hot latte.

Starbucks has seen its share of failures when expanding into global
markets. In 2000, the company opened its first coffee shop in Australia.
However, the company failed to allow the Australians to "develop an
appetite for the Starbucks brand." Asking locals to pay a premium for a
brand that wasn't already ingrained in their culture didn't go over
well. In the first seven years, the company reported losses of over
\$105 million and closures of 61 Australian stores. Since then,
Starbucks has changed its marketing strategy in Australia to focus on
tourists rather than locals, and the result has been slower than
desired.

The company has learned from its failures and successes across the
globe. For example, in 2018, Starbucks opened its Starbucks Reserve
Roastery in Milan, Italy. You might be surprised when visiting the
Roastery as you can't order a Frappuccino, but instead, you can order
wood-fired pizza and cocktails. The company promotes its Milan location
as a cup of coffee and an experience. "Milan Roastery is the crown jewel
of Starbucks global retail footprint---a place where Italian customers
can come to discover the art and science of coffee in a breath-taking
environment."

Global markets vary by many factors. Look at our coffee example.
Something as seemingly basic as coffee is perceived very differently
across the globe, and marketers must be keenly aware of how to appeal to
each market.

# Endnotes {#sect-00001}

:::: {#rf-001 .note}
::: title
:::

1\.

"Company Timeline," Starbucks Stories & News, Starbucks, January 24,
2019, https://stories.starbucks.com/press/2019/company-timeline/.
::::

:::: {#rf-002 .note}
::: title
:::

2\.

"'Tis the #PSL Season Again!," Starbucks Stories & News, Starbucks,
August 27, 2021,
https://stories.starbucks.com/emea/stories/2021/tis-the-psl-season-again/.
::::

:::: {#rf-003 .note}
::: title
:::

3\.

Ash Read, "Everything You Need to Know about Global Marketing Strategy,"

Ecommerce Marketing Blog

, Sumo, updated January 21, 2020,
https://sumo.com/stories/global-marketing-strategy.
::::

:::: {#rf-004 .note}
::: title
:::

4\.

Ashley Turner, "Why There Are Almost No Starbucks in Australia," CNBC,
July 25, 2018,
https://www.cnbc.com/2018/07/20/starbucks-australia-coffee-failure.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-005 .note}
::: title
:::

5\.

Turner, "No Starbucks in Australia."
::::

:::: {#rf-006 .note}
::: title
:::

6\.

Starbucks Arrives in Milan: Roastery Honors Italian Espresso Culture,
Design and Craft," Starbucks Stories & News, Starbucks, September 5,
2018,
https://stories.starbucks.com/press/2018/starbucks-arrives-in-milan-italy-roastery/.
::::
