m00039

810b44d6-298c-4293-bbba-f15ce46e5fcf

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define global market opportunities.

Explain why international trade is advantageous to business.

Discuss the challenges of international trade.

# Global Market Opportunities Defined {#sect-00002}

For some, the thought of expanding business operations into the global
market is new, exciting, and fun. For others, it may seem daunting or
impossible. At some point, most if not all companies will decide if and
how they will expand into global markets based on global market
opportunities. Global market opportunities simply refer to conditions
that are favorable for a company to expand outside its home country
market. These conditions include internal factors, such as the company's
ability and knowledge, as well as external factors, such as market
growth, customer demand, and regulations or trade barriers within the
industry.

Many companies have a presence in the global marketplace at some level.
Consider a small Etsy shop that sells custom-printed T-shirts. While the
T-shirts may be printed in the United States (maybe even in someone's
garage), the T-shirts may be purchased in foreign markets, such as
China. While Etsy is a small-scale example, larger companies may have a
greater presence in the global marketplace. Consider that Nike, founded
in 1964, now sells its products in 170 countries that serve more than 30
major sports and consumer lifestyles. While there are considerable risks
to entering global markets, there are numerous advantages as well.

# Advantages to International Trade {#sect-00003}

There are several advantages to international trade, including increased
revenues, decreased competition, faster growth, diversification of risk,
and the ability to more easily find buyers of excess inventory. Let's
look at each of these in more detail.

## Increased Revenues {#sect-00004}

One of the most obvious advantages to international trade is an increase
in revenue. Recall that revenue is the money earned from business
operations, so the more countries in which a product or service is
available, the more revenue will be generated.

## Decreased Competition {#sect-00005}

A US-based company may have a great deal of competition. Consider the
automobile industry. In the United States, most households own at least
one vehicle. Competition in this industry is rather fierce, and it would
be difficult for a new company to enter the market. However, in
developing countries where automobiles are not as prevalent or
infrastructure is still in development, competition for automobile
buyers could be much lower.

Alternatively, fiercer automobile competition in some countries may
force competitors to leave the market or choose not to enter at all.
China is the world's largest vehicle market in terms of both sales and
manufacturing output. As such, carmakers around the world continue to
vie for the Chinese automobile market share. However, the market is
mainly dominated by its domestic automakers, making international
competition difficult.

For example, the Hongguang Mini EV, a battery electric microcar
manufactured by China-based SAIC-GM-Wuling, has been a top EV seller
since 2020. In an effort to take market share, Ford has set the
"groundwork to accelerate a refresh of the company's product portfolio
in China by launching three new vehicles offered only in China."

## Faster Growth {#sect-00006}

For companies with a growth strategy, international expansion may be a
viable option to achieve these goals. This is particularly true when the
home country's market is saturated or experiencing slow or no growth. A
market becomes saturated when there is enough capacity in the industry
to meet all of consumer demand or when consumer demand begins to
decrease. Either instance may make the international market an
attractive opportunity for a business.

In addition to the growth of the company, as firms decide to expand into
global markets, the international market will also experience growth.
For example, when Amazon expanded its global operations to include a
fulfillment center in Poland, the company had to hire employees to
fulfill those orders. As of 2022, the Poland fulfillment center employed
25,000 people. These individuals use their paychecks to purchase goods
and services within their economy, causing the economy to grow. As new
companies enter these markets, individuals are given the opportunity to
consume a wider selection of goods and services and to move into higher
standards of living.

## Diversification of Risk {#sect-00007}

Risk refers to any situation or condition that leads a company to
decreased profits or even failure. Have you ever heard the saying "Don't
put all your eggs in one basket"? It refers to putting all of your
effort in one area and risking great loss. It's a reminder of how
international expansion can help diversify business risk. Rather than
focusing on one product or one market, companies are able to spread
their risk across various markets. Additionally, while one country may
be experiencing a recession and causing sales for a company to decline,
another country may be experiencing a boom, which would likely result in
an increase in sales for that same company. With operations in multiple
countries, a company can potentially balance the up and down markets. A
downturn in one or a few markets will not cause the company to fail
completely because the demand in other markets may be growing.

## Disposal of Surplus Goods {#sect-00008}

A final major advantage to international trade is the ability to dispose
of surplus goods. For example, prior to each Super Bowl, the NFL makes
clothing for both teams that states each is the winner so that supply is
available immediately after the game. However, only the winning team's
clothing is sold after the game. Rather than the losing team's clothing
going to the landfills, it is donated to other countries, decreasing the
waste of the unsold product. Do not confuse the disposal of surplus
goods with the concept of *dumping*, an illegal practice that will be
discussed later in the chapter.

# Challenges to International Trade {#sect-00009}

While there are numerous advantages to international trade, there are
also challenges. Those challenges are discussed in more detail in the
following sections.

## Understanding the Business Environment {#sect-00010}

Regardless of where a business is located, its success depends largely
on management's understanding of the business landscape. The business
landscape refers to all internal and external factors of the business,
its industry, and its environment. Companies that intend to expand
internationally often make the grave mistake of assuming the landscape
of a new market is the same of that in the home country, a concept known
as ethnocentrism. In most instances, this causes companies to stumble or
even fail. Understanding the nuances, expectations, and regulations in
international markets is one element that drives success.

## Understanding the Target Country's Business Politics {#sect-00011}

Politics, laws, and industry relationships shape the environment of
businesses both locally and abroad. The way business is conducted varies
greatly from country to country, and businesspeople must not only be
aware of these differences but must also have the ability to adapt to
the local business politics.

## Differences in Regulations and Marketing {#sect-00012}

Remember, there is no one-size-fits-all marketing campaign. You can
imagine how this notion is amplified when thinking about marketing in
various countries. Marketers must be in tune with their target markets
to succeed. Additionally, marketing is perceived differently in various
cultures, and it is important to understand how cultural differences
influence consumer behavior.

For example, in the United States, it is not uncommon to see a plethora
of advertisements for prescription medications targeting the general
public. Most other countries do not regularly advertise prescriptions to
the public but rather to the doctors prescribing those medications. In
fact, the United States and New Zealand are the only countries where
this type of marketing is allowed. Each international market requires
marketers to adapt or create new marketing strategies, which can vary
considerably with each of the marketing mix elements---product, price,
place, and promotion.

## Cultural Differences {#sect-00013}

Local culture has an impact on marketing campaigns. It's common for
marketers and other businesspeople to find it challenging to understand
the differences between their own culture and the target market.
Cultural sensitivity can help to alleviate these challenges when
preparing marketing campaigns for other countries and cultures. Cultural
sensitivity is the awareness and appreciation of and the ability to
adapt to a cultural, ethnic, racial, or other group other than one's
own. By increasing cultural sensitivity, marketers can better create
marketing campaigns that truly encompass the target market.

Two examples of companies not readily prepared come from Nivea and
Gucci. In 2017, Nivea launched a social media campaigned stating "White
Is Purity." The phrase was perceived by the public as being racially
insensitive. To make matters worse, the slogan was then used by white
supremacists in their propaganda. While the company apologized and
removed the campaign, these marketers should never have let the campaign
leave the idea room. In 2019, luxury fashion designer Gucci introduced a
balaclava knit jumper that had material that went up and around the
mouth. The advertisement for this clothing featured a White woman
modeling the sweater with bright red lipstick. Many critics noted its
similarity to blackface. The company immediately pulled the \$890
sweater from stores.

:::: {#note-00013 .note}
::: title
Gucci
:::

Read more about the [balaclava polo jumper from Italian designer
Gucci](#), the public commentary, and Gucci's official response. Also
check out the details behind the [Nivea "White Is Purity" ad](#) and the
uproar from consumers.
::::

Cultural differences are an important factor in the marketing of a
product, but these differences are also critical with business
practices. Suppose you are meeting with a business partner in another
country. Do you know if there is a gift-giving expectation? You may be
aware that there are ethical concerns and sometimes prohibitions with
gift giving in the United States, but in other countries it would be
unprofessional to attend a meeting without a gift. For example, in
Japan, it is customary to bring a small gift with an initial sales call.
In the United States, some companies won't allow employees to accept
gifts.

Using another US example, it is not unusual to "get right down to
business" when meeting with others. Conversely, it may take several
meetings of developing rapport with Japanese businesspeople before
business is ever discussed. In addition, it's commonplace in Japan for
people to not shake hands (see [\#](#)) but rather bow to one another.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

:::: {#note-00016 .note}
::: title
Cultural Sensitivity
:::

There are many ways you can begin to be more culturally sensitive. The
first step is awareness. [Read this short article](#) on five ways to
improve your cultural awareness. Also check out this video to learn how
to develop cultural competency as a skill.

[Introduction to Cultural Sensitivity](#)
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00014}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00015}

:::: {#rf-007 .note}
::: title
:::

7\.

"Number 2: We Are Global,"

Nike, Inc.: A Growth Company

, Nike, n.d.,
https://media.corporate-ir.net/media_files/IROL/10/100529/nike-gs09/global.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-008 .note}
::: title
:::

8\.

"Automotive Industry," China: Country Commercial Guide, International
Trade Administration, January 4, 2022,
https://www.trade.gov/country-commercial-guides/china-automotive-industry.
::::

:::: {#rf-009 .note}
::: title
:::

9\.

"Chinese Car Market: How Automakers Compete for First Place," Daxue
Consulting, August 2, 2020,
https://daxueconsulting.com/chinese-automakers-compete-for-first-place/.
::::

:::: {#rf-010 .note}
::: title
:::

10\.

Wikipedia, s.v. "Wuling Hongguang Mini EV," last modified August 28,
2022, 02:48, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wuling_Hongguang_Mini_EV.
::::

:::: {#rf-011 .note}
::: title
:::

11\.

"Ford China Sells 125,000 Vehicles in First Quarter, Accelerating
Localization and Delivery of Ford+ Growth Plan," Ford Media Center, Ford
Motor Company, April 14, 2022,
https://media.ford.com/content/fordmedia/fap/cn/en/news/2022/04/14/ford-china-sales.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-012 .note}
::: title
:::

12\.

"Amazon Creates 25,000 Permanent Roles and Keeps Growing in Poland,"
Amazon News, Amazon.com,
https://www.aboutamazon.eu/news/press-lounge/amazon-creates-25-000-permanent-roles-and-keeps-growing-in-poland.
::::

:::: {#rf-013 .note}
::: title
:::

13\.

Will Kenton, "What Is Business Risk? Definition, Factors, and Examples,"
Investopedia, Dotdash Meredith, updated March 25, 2022,
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/b/businessrisk.asp.
::::

:::: {#rf-014 .note}
::: title
:::

14\.

Jordan Mendoza, "What Happens to the Super Bowl 56 Championship Gear
Made for the Cincinnati Bengals?,"

USA Today

, February 14, 2022,
https://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/nfl/super-bowl/2022/02/14/super-bowl-bengals-losing-gear/6638847001/.
::::

:::: {#rf-015 .note}
::: title
:::

15\.

"Do Not Get Sold on Drug Advertising," Harvard Health Publishing,
Harvard Medical School, February 14, 2017,
https://www.health.harvard.edu/medications/do-not-get-sold-on-drug-advertising.
::::

:::: {#rf-016 .note}
::: title
:::

16\.

APA Dictionary of Psychology

, s.v. "cultural sensitivity," accessed August 30, 2022,
https://dictionary.apa.org/cultural-sensitivity.
::::

:::: {#rf-017 .note}
::: title
:::

17\.

"This Cinco de Mayo, Don't Be a Jerk: 6 Valuable Lessons from Culturally
Insensitive Ad Campaigns of Recent Months," Ideas, Thunderfoot, May 5,
2017,
https://teamthunderfoot.com/ideas/valuable-lessons-culturally-insensitive-ad-campaigns/.
::::

:::: {#rf-018 .note}
::: title
:::

18\.

Niamh O, "10 Brands and Businesses That Got Their Marketing Horribly
Wrong," TopMBA, QS Quacquarelli Symonds, updated April 15, 2021,
https://www.topmba.com/mba-programs/specializations/marketing/10-brands-and-businesses-got-their-marketing-horribly-wrong.
::::

:::: {#rf-019 .note}
::: title
:::

19\.

"Guide to Gift Giving around the World,"

GlobeSmart Blog

, GlobeSmart, last modified April 7, 2020,
https://www.globesmart.com/blog/guide-to-gift-giving-around-the-world/.
::::

:::: {#rf-020 .note}
::: title
:::

20\.

"Business Etiquette in Japan," The City of Yokohama Europe
Representative Office, last modified August 17, 2020,
https://yokohama-city.de/en/business-etiquette-japan/.
::::

# 

business landscape

everything internal and external to the business, its industry, and its
environment

cultural sensitivity

awareness and appreciation of and the ability to adapt to a cultural,
ethnic, racial, or another group other than one's own

ethnocentrism

an assumption that the business landscape or culture of an international
market is the same as the home country or personal culture

global market opportunities

conditions that are favorable for a company to expand into the global
marketplace

risk

any situation or condition that leads a company to decreased profits or
even failure
