m00040

c5150dda-dcd8-403e-901b-f510d533be44

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify the different ways marketers can assess opportunity in global
markets.

Discuss effective methods of analyzing global opportunities.

# Internal Assessment for Global Readiness {#sect-00002}

According to Douglas Quackenbos and his coauthors in their *Harvard
Business Review* article "Does Your Company Have What It Takes to Go
Global," "external factors only set the stage for an international
opportunity." In other words, even though a global market may represent
an opportunity for the company, the organization also must be prepared
internally to expand. The factors external to the organization---a
country's economy, for example---is only half of the equation. Company
leaders must do a thorough internal assessment of their organization to
determine if it has what it will take to expand globally. Managers and
marketers who will be working directly in the international market
should have fully assessed the other countries' regulations, business
landscape, and cultural differences, for example.

*Harvard Business Review* has a published list of the seven common
characteristics found with companies that have been successful in
international expansion. The list includes attitude, aptitude,
magnitude, latitude, rectitude, exactitude, and fortitude, each of which
is defined in [\#](#).

  *Characteristic*   *Definition*
  ------------------ --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Attitude           Global expansion is a priority.
  Aptitude           The company has the knowledge and skills to expand.
  Magnitude          The scope of expansion is aligned with capabilities.
  Latitude           The company has the ability to adapt.
  Rectitude          The company has the legal and ethical flexibility to adapt to foreign markets.
  Exactitude         Corporate culture aligns with flexibility and ambiguity of expansion.
  Fortitude          There is a commitment to long-term expansion despite setbacks.

  : Seven Characteristics of Firms That Win Globally {#table-00001}

# Economic Infrastructure {#sect-00003}

Economic infrastructure refers to the facilities of an economy that
benefit the production and distribution of goods and services.
Infrastructure includes anything that would be required to produce
and/or transport goods and services---for example, roads, railways, and
high-speed Internet. Imagine that you are starting a lemon tree farm.
You would not plan your farm in Michigan, where the temperatures often
fall below freezing, because that would wipe out your lemon crops. Or
imagine starting an online company where you sell art, but you live in a
location where your Internet access is spotty and unreliable.
Infrastructure considerations are critical in business needs evaluation.

# Consumer Income and Purchasing Power {#sect-00004}

There are three types of income for you to be aware of:

Consumer income

, the amount of money a household or individual earns. Consumer income
is often defined as the amount of money a household has to spend.

Disposable income

, the income available after taxes are paid.

Discretionary income

, the money available once consumers have paid taxes and living expenses
such as, rent, food, heat, groceries, etc. This income is the
predominant type of income that interests marketers because it's the
money consumers typically have the most flexibility with.

Marketers evaluate discretionary and disposable income differently. It
depends on the type of product or service they offer. For example,
consider the impact of inflation. With inflation, the cost of goods and
services increases but individual income does not also increase, meaning
things cost more but there isn't additional income to cover the
additional cost. When this happens, consumers purchase fewer items and
prioritize their spending differently because with the increase in the
cost of necessities, there is less discretionary income to spend. As a
result, consumers will cut back on nonessential items. Due to this,
marketers of luxury goods are concerned with discretionary income, while
marketers of packaged consumer goods are concerned with disposable
income.

Companies are also impacted by inflation. Just as it costs consumers
more to purchase the same goods and services during inflation, inflation
will increase the cost of production for companies to create the same
number of products. Companies have various tactics on addressing
environmental influences like inflation. One way in which companies of
consumer-packaged goods avoid increasing prices during inflation is to
decrease the size of products while not increasing the price, a practice
known as shrinkflation. For example, Procter & Gamble's Charmin
ultra-soft toilet paper 18-count mega package was decreased in 2022 from
264 double-ply sheets per roll to 244 two-ply sheets, yet the price
either remained the same or was slightly increased. Often with
shrinkflation, consumers don't notice that a package is smaller, and
they focus on their ability to get as much as they can for the price.

# Purchasing Power {#sect-00005}

Purchasing power is defined as how many goods can be purchased with one
unit of currency. As you can imagine, purchasing power varies greatly
across the globe and is of great importance when deciding whether to
expand into foreign markets. For example, in a country where consumers
have very little income and poor purchasing power, it would be difficult
to sell expensive, nonessential goods. Consumers simply would not have
the money to purchase them.

# Currency Exchange Rates {#sect-00006}

Marketers and other business executives must understand foreign exchange
rates and how fluctuations can affect marketing strategies. An exchange
rate is the rate at which one country's currency can be exchanged for
that of another country. Because currency exchange rates fluctuate
daily, the prices of goods and services in global markets will also
fluctuate. In turn, fluctuations in prices of goods and services will
have an impact on the purchasing power of consumers and even larger
effects on economic indicators such as jobs and inflation.

Suppose that in 1997, your US-based family imported British pantry items
from the UK in order to create and export its own brand of barbecue
sauce for sale in the UK. In 1997, it took \$1.64 to buy 1 British pound
(£). So, \$1.00 was worth £0.61 in British currency (1/1.6). In this
situation, the dollar is relatively weak compared to the British pound.
One British pound would go a long way toward paying for that barbecue
sauce.

Fast-forward 25 years. For the majority of 2021, it only took \$1.37 to
buy £1.00. So, \$1.00 would buy £0.73 worth of British goods in 2021
(1/1.37). As you can see, the dollar had strengthened relative to the
pound (which is the same as saying the pound had weakened relative to
the dollar). This means that, by 2021, your dollar would buy more in
terms of paying for British imports; conversely, consumers in the UK
would have to pay more for your barbecue sauce!

:::: {#note-00009 .note}
::: title
Exchange Rates
:::

[Exchange-Rates.org is a great resource](#) for comparing exchange rates
between hundreds of countries. Try it out by indicating countries in the
From and To fields and check out the currency value between countries.
::::

# Analyzing Governmental Actions {#sect-00007}

Just as every economy in the world operates differently, so does each
country's government. Businesses are greatly influenced by politics in
every country (some more than others). Therefore, understanding how
governmental actions impact the ability to be successful in a global
market is imperative.

## Political Stability {#sect-00008}

A country's political stability can impact nearly every facet of the
country. Most notably, political stability has been linked to economic
conditions in various countries. When there is increased political
stability, the country's economy tends to stabilize or grow. This is of
keen interest to marketers as they consider new foreign markets to
enter. As a country's stability increases, the opportunities to gain
early entry into these markets grows. Conversely, many companies choose
to avoid entering markets that lack political stability, not only
because of the shaky economy but also because of potential changes in
leadership, laws, and regulations.

Consider Russia's invasion of Ukraine in early 2022. In response, many
companies pulled their operations out of Russia in a show of support for
Ukraine. McDonald's, which opened its first Russian location in 1990,
was one of the first global companies to cease operations there. The
company stated that the activities of the Putin government were not
consistent with McDonald's values, but also that the turbulent operating
environment made it untenable to continue operations there.

## Trade Regulations {#sect-00009}

In an effort to promote (or inhibit) trade with other countries,
governments often have some level of trade regulations. These
regulations can be within industries or with specific nations or groups
of nations. The common trade regulations surrounding imports and exports
around the world include tariffs, quotas, trade blocs, and embargoes.
Additionally, countries have specific regulations for foreign companies
hoping to establish business within their markets.

Tariffs are taxes that governments impose on imports coming into the
country. Tariffs can be imposed as a percentage (most common) or dollar
amount. Tariffs are generally used by governments to bring more money
into a country. Japan, for example, has one of the lowest tariffs in the
world at 2.5 percent for nonagricultural products. Conversely, the East
African nation of Seychelles once had a much higher tariff rate,
averaging well over 50 percent prior to joining the World Trade
Organization (WTO) in 2015. After joining the WTO, tariffs were reduced
to under 25 percent.

Quotas are maximum allowable units to be imported into or exported out
of a specific country. Quotas are often used by a country to protect a
domestic industry. For example, if the US government limited the number
of Japanese automobiles to 2 million imports per year, this would cause
lower sales of imported vehicles and, in turn, higher sales of
domestically produced vehicles.

Embargoes are bans on trading a product with a specific country and are
imposed between countries that have different political ideologies. The
United States, for example, has embargoes against Cuba, Iran, North
Korea, and Syria that prohibit all transactions with these countries
without a license.

Trade blocs are intergovernmental agreements that remove barriers of
trade within regions of the world. There are currently 10 major trade
blocs in the world. The United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA)
and the EU27 are two prominent examples. The USMCA allows free trade
among Canada, the United States, and Mexico.

There are a variety of examples of the sorts of approaches countries
will take with trade regulations. For example, companies may impose
strict laws and regulations on who can own the factors of production. In
some instances, there are issues with corrupt governments requiring
bribes and kickbacks.

Transparency International publishes an annual survey called the
Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI). Marketers use this survey for
insights into country dynamics and can evaluate market viability of
their product or service offering. This guide helps company leadership
determine how much work they may have in understanding a country's way
of operating and what kind of work it would take to make their product
or service successful.

:::: {#note-00018 .note}
::: title
CPI
:::

The Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI) is an interesting and interactive
tool where you can select specific countries to find their CPI rating.
One hundred eighty countries are each rated on a scale of 0 to 100,
where 100 indicates very clean and 0 means highly corrupt. [Interact
with the index here](#) and learn more about the [CPI rating scale and
assessment by watching this video](#).

If you'd like to learn more about the Transparency International
organization and its work, check out this [brief summary of its 2021
annual report](#).
::::

# Analyzing Sociocultural Factors {#sect-00010}

While the economic and political factors of a foreign market will
determine a firm's ability to *enter* a market, the sociocultural
factors may be most important in determining whether goods and services
will be *successful* in a market. Sociocultural factors include values,
behaviors, culture, lifestyle, and language that shape a person's or
group's way of living. As you can imagine, there are hundreds of
cultures around the world, and every culture within a country has its
own nuances, preferences, and even ways of conducting business.
Marketers who want enter foreign markets must have a deep understanding
of these factors to establish effective marketing strategies.

## Lifestyles {#sect-00011}

The way a person or group lives is known as their lifestyle. Each person
has their own unique lifestyle, while cultures and families share
similar traits within their collective lifestyles. Marketers must get to
know their consumers to understand their buying behavior and how their
lifestyles affect it.

In 2009, toy manufacturer Mattel Inc. opened a huge, three-story,
Barbie-inspired flagship store in Shanghai, China. What marketers failed
to do before making this market-entry decision was to study the
lifestyles of Chinese consumers. In China, the culture stresses
educational toys and playtime that builds skills; Barbie was neither of
those. The store closed after only two years.

Marketers must also be careful to avoid stereotypes of other cultures
and countries. Stereotypes are oversimplified perceptions, images, or
ideas of a person or groups. While they can be negative or positive,
they are overgeneralized perceptions about an entire group or people.
Companies sometimes learn the hard way to avoid stereotypes.

For example, in 2014, Delta Air Lines, a major US passenger airline
carrier (see [\#](#)), made a big stereotype blunder with its social
media marketing. The company sent out a congratulatory tweet to the US
team for its win over the Ghanaian team in the World Cup in which it
used a photo of a giraffe to represent Ghana. Unfortunately, Delta
marketers failed to realize that there is not one wild giraffe in Ghana;
this is a frequent stereotype about the entire continent of Africa. In
fact, there are over 50 countries in Africa, but only around 20 have
naturally wild giraffes. The Twitter market caught on to this error
quickly and proceeded to tease Delta for its stereotype mistake.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

## Law and Politics {#sect-00012}

Laws and politics have a large impact on a country's economy and, in
turn, how products will (or even can) be marketed. Political and legal
decisions made within a country's system surrounding tariffs, labor
laws, the environment, and even an expectation of bribery can impact a
business's decisions. Even politics between two countries can have a big
impact on decisions made by marketers.

In 2019, President Donald Trump increased the tariffs on Chinese goods
to 25 percent. Several companies subsequently opted to pull their
production facilities out of China. For example, Apple and Dell moved
some of their production to Vietnam and other parts of Asia to avoid
these tariffs.

## Education {#sect-00013}

Education impacts a consumer's product and service choices. Generally
speaking, the more educated an individual is, the more discretion they
use when purchasing products. In other words, that person will spend
more time researching various products before deciding which to
purchase. Levels of education also effect an individual's choices in
magazines, television shows, and other entertainment. Therefore,
platforms, messages, and even specific words marketers choose for the
promotion mix will depend on the level of education that the target
market holds. Is the market tech savvy? If not, using technical words
and messages may confuse a consumer who doesn't understand the message.

## Technology {#sect-00014}

The availability of technology within an international market will have
several impacts on marketing efforts. First, the ability for consumers
to access and use technology will directly impact the goods and services
that are being marketed. Second, the company's access to technology to
produce goods and services within the country will also be impacted.

For example, Uganda has the second-youngest population in the world. It
is also ranks among the poorest countries in the world. Because of this,
someone may make the mistake of thinking that Uganda would not be a
market to enter with technology, but this is far from true. While many
citizens of Uganda live without electricity or running water, the
country's population of 45.74 million is estimated to own around 16
million cell phones, but only around 1 million homes have electric
lights. Due to the young population seeking to be more connected with
others, the people of Uganda prioritize and are heavily reliant on their
cell phones (see [\#](#)).

But if there is limited electricity, how do Ugandans charge their cell
phones? It has certainly been a challenge for many who have to share
solar power with neighbors or travel to a nearby village that has
electricity. However, the use of portable charging solutions has become
more widespread. One company, Charge Ko Technologies, has turned this
into an opportunity and created various portable charging solutions,
including solar backpacks and energy generation through bicycle usage.
While some impoverished Ugandan consumers may not be able to afford
these products, the company is hopeful that the wealthier will purchase
enough to help bring the price down over time.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

## Conducting a Cross-Cultural Analysis {#sect-00015}

When the Walt Disney Company decided to open Disneyland Hong Kong in
2005, the company struggled to gain momentum with its Chinese target
market. Among other blunders, such as its high admission price, the
company assumed that its Chinese market would love the Disney brand as
much as Americans do. The company failed to realize that, unlike
Americans, the Chinese did not grow up with the Disney brands and
characters. Imagine walking into a fantasy theme park with characters
you had never heard of or seen before. Unlike Americans, the Chinese do
not view Disney characters as cultural icons. The fantasy aspect of the
brand and park was another issue Disney faced. Its closest competitor,
Ocean Park, provided visitors with real animals, educational material,
and thrilling rides. The Asian market, which values education, found
Disney's high ticket prices with little educational value to be wasteful
when the park initially opened.

## Values {#sect-00016}

Cultural values are often unspoken. They include the aesthetics,
socialization, and religious aspects woven throughout a culture.
Consider the Disney example. Marketers stumbled with truly understanding
the Chinese consumer culture when opening Disney Hong Kong by assuming
that Chinese values were similar to those of Americans.

## Customs and Cultural Symbols {#sect-00017}

Like other cultural values, customs are often unspoken. Customs consist
of mannerisms or behaviors that are considered characteristics within a
social system. For example, in Spain, the afternoon siesta is a cultural
custom. The siesta is an afternoon nap taken after the midday meal.
Businesses will close for extended lunch breaks to allow employees to
take their afternoon siesta. If you are considering opening a business
in Barcelona, you should expect to do the same!

Cultural symbols are physical representations of a culture's language,
values, and traditions. They include items such as flags, gestures,
holiday decorations, and many others. For example, in China, the
national animal is the giant panda, and it has significant cultural
importance as a symbol. Similarly, the maple leaf is symbolic of Canada
(see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

## Language, Idioms, and Nuances {#sect-00018}

It may seem obvious, but even language differences play a large role in
the marketer's job as products and services are rolled out in
international markets. Brands and product names may have one meaning in
the home country and a completely different meaning in another language.
For example, Nestlé had problems when rolling out its Gerber baby food
in France because "Gerber" translates to "puke" in French. For obvious
reasons, this didn't appeal to French parents choosing food for their
infants.

Nuances are words, phrases, or beliefs that vary slightly from one
culture to another and can cause miscommunication in translation. For
example, UK citizens use the word "jelly" to describe what people in the
United States would call "Jell-O," and they use the word "biscuit" for
"cookie."

Idioms are phrases used in a culture that mean something completely
different. For example, if you hear someone say "break a leg" in the
United States, it would mean "good luck." However, using this idiom in
another culture may leave the other person quite confused or even
offended, thinking it was meant literally to go break their leg. In
Spanish-speaking cultures, the popular idiom "a lot of noise and no
walnuts (mucho ruido y pocas nueces)" means "all talk and no action,"
but it would have no meaning in the United States.

However, even idioms can become problematic within and across languages
and cultures. In 2022, Lizzo, a world-renowned pop star, issued an
apology and a rerelease of a song because she had used a culturally
insensitive word that she was unaware of at the time of recording.

:::: {#note-00040 .note}
::: title
Global Marketing Manager
:::

With the increase in companies doing business internationally, global
marketing managers' job roles are becoming more important. Global
marketing managers work to understand what international markets need,
the competition, rules and regulations, and local cultures and values.
They then use this information to develop global marketing strategies
that appeal to the local market. Learn more about this role from these
sources:

Noodle article: "

How to Become a Global Marketing Manager

"

Marketing Business Network video: "What Is Global Marketing?"

[What is Global Marketing?](#)

Learn.org: "

What's the Job Description of a Global Marketing Professional

?"
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00019}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00020}

:::: {#rf-021 .note}
::: title
:::

21\.

Douglas Quackenbos et al., "Does Your Company Have What It Takes to Go
Global?,"

Harvard Business Review

, April 11, 2016,
https://hbr.org/2016/04/does-your-company-have-what-it-takes-to-go-global.
::::

:::: {#rf-022 .note}
::: title
:::

22\.

Quackenbos et al., "Does Your Company?"
::::

:::: {#rf-023 .note}
::: title
:::

23\.

Module 1: Introduction to Infrastructure Economics

, NPTEL, accessed February 3, 2022,
https://nptel.ac.in/content/storage2/courses/109106089/module%201.pdf.
::::

:::: {#rf-024 .note}
::: title
:::

24\.

CNNWire, "Toilet Paper Roll Slimming Down? Products May Continue to
Shrink in Size, Quantity amid Inflation," ABC11 Raleigh-Durham, NC, ABC,
March 9, 2022,
https://abc11.com/inflation-high-prices-consumer-products-shrinkflation/11635527/.
::::

:::: {#rf-025 .note}
::: title
:::

25\.

"What You Should Know before Going Global,"

Small Business Management in the 21st Century

(Washington, DC: Saylor Academy, 2012),
https://saylordotorg.github.io/text_small-business-management-in-the-21st-century/s19-02-what-you-should-know-before-go.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-026 .note}
::: title
:::

26\.

Saylor Academy, "What You Should Know."
::::

:::: {#rf-027 .note}
::: title
:::

27\.

"USD to GBP Historical Exchange Rates," OFX, USForex, last modified June
30, 2022,
https://www.ofx.com/en-us/forex-news/historical-exchange-rates/usd/gbp/.
::::

:::: {#rf-028 .note}
::: title
:::

28\.

Financial Management Service,

Treasury Reporting Rates of Exchange 1997

(Washington, DC: US Department of the Treasury, 1997),
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/GOVPUB-T63_100-df6e98d19bcf6ba2d231a10f6c9d5260/pdf/GOVPUB-T63_100-df6e98d19bcf6ba2d231a10f6c9d5260.pdf.
::::

:::: {#rf-029 .note}
::: title
:::

29\.

Mădălina Radu, "Political Stability: A Condition for Sustainable Growth
in Romania

?," Procedia Economics and Finance

30 (2015): 751--757, https://doi.org/10.1016/S2212-5671(15)01324-6.
::::

:::: {#rf-030 .note}
::: title
:::

30\.

Bill Chappell, "McDonald's Is Leaving Russia, after More Than 30 Years,"
NPR, May 16, 2022,
https://www.npr.org/2022/05/16/1099079032/mcdonalds-leaving-russia.
::::

:::: {#rf-031 .note}
::: title
:::

31\.

"Trade Regulations of Japan," Guide and Resources, HKTDC Research, May
10, 2022, https://research.hktdc.com/en/article/MzM0NTcxMjg4.
::::

:::: {#rf-032 .note}
::: title
:::

32\.

"Seychelles Joins the World Trade Organization and Reduces Tariffs,"
Simplified Trade Solutions, April 7, 2015,
https://simplifiedtradesolutions.com/seychelles-joins-the-world-trade-organization-and-reduces-tariffs/.
::::

:::: {#rf-033 .note}
::: title
:::

33\.

Simplified Trade Solutions, "Seychelles."
::::

:::: {#rf-034 .note}
::: title
:::

34\.

"Effect of Import Quotas," Glossary Terms, Economics Help, accessed
August 30, 2022,
https://www.economicshelp.org/blog/glossary/effect-of-import-quotas/.
::::

:::: {#rf-035 .note}
::: title
:::

35\.

"Embargoed and Sanctioned Countries," Office of Trade Compliance,
University of Pittsburgh, last modified March 8, 2021,
https://www.tradecompliance.pitt.edu/embargoed-and-sanctioned-countries.
::::

:::: {#rf-036 .note}
::: title
:::

36\.

"10 Major Regional Trading Blocs in the World,"

Export Genius Blog

, Export Genius, March 30, 2018,
https://www.exportgenius.in/blog/10-major-regional-trading-blocs-of-the-world-236.php.
::::

:::: {#rf-037 .note}
::: title
:::

37\.

Andrew Seale, "Seven Epic Cases of Companies That Failed
Internationally," Touchpoint by Firmex, Firmex,
https://www.firmex.com/resources/blog/seven-epic-fails-by-businesses-that-tried-expanding-into-foreign-markets/.
::::

:::: {#rf-038 .note}
::: title
:::

38\.

Saul McLeod, "Stereotypes," Simply Psychology, Simply Scholar, updated
2017, https://www.simplypsychology.org/katz-braly.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-039 .note}
::: title
:::

39\.

Zoe Kelland and Erica Sánchez, "Debunking 15 Common Myths and
Misconceptions about Africa," Global Citizen, Global Poverty Project,
January 12, 2018,
https://www.globalcitizen.org/en/content/africans-are-all-poor-and-15-other-myths/.
::::

:::: {#rf-040 .note}
::: title
:::

40\.

Benjamin Elisha Sawe, "Where Do Giraffes Live?," WorldAtlas, Valnet,
July 25, 2018,
https://www.worldatlas.com/articles/where-do-giraffes-live.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-041 .note}
::: title
:::

41\.

Yun Li, "More Than 50 Companies Reportedly Pull Production out of China
due to Trade War," CNBC, July 18, 2019,
https://www.cnbc.com/2019/07/18/more-than-50-companies-reportedly-pull-production-out-of-china-due-to-trade-war.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-042 .note}
::: title
:::

42\.

Abhijeet Pratap, "Effect of Demographic Factors on Consumer Behavior:
Age, Sex, Income and Education," Notesmatic, updated December 27, 2021,
https://notesmatic.com/effect-of-demographic-factors-on-consumer-behavior-age-sex-income-and-education/.
::::

:::: {#rf-043 .note}
::: title
:::

43\.

Anna Engelbertink and Schevaa van Hullebusch, "The Effects of Education
and Income on Consumers' Motivation to Read Online Hotel Reviews,"

Research in Hospitality Management

2, no. 1--2 (2013): 57--61,
https://doi.org/10.1080/22243534.2013.11828292.
::::

:::: {#rf-044 .note}
::: title
:::

44\.

Jennifer Long, "Technology in Uganda Sees Profitable Growth,"

Borgen Magazine

, August 17, 2020, https://www.borgenmagazine.com/technology-in-uganda/.
::::

:::: {#rf-045 .note}
::: title
:::

45\.

Moses Owori, "Poverty in Uganda: National and Regional Data and Trends,"
Resources, Development Initiatives, October 2, 2020,
https://devinit.org/resources/poverty-uganda-national-and-regional-data-and-trends/.
::::

:::: {#rf-046 .note}
::: title
:::

46\.

Laura Gray, "Does Uganda Have More Mobile Phones Than Light Bulbs?," BBC
News, BBC, March 25, 2016, https://www.bbc.com/news/magazine-35883649.
::::

:::: {#rf-047 .note}
::: title
:::

47\.

Geoffrey Mutabazi, "Ugandan Startup Finds Innovative Solutions for
Mobile Charging," interview by Paul Ndiho,

Africa 54 Interviews

, VOA News, Voice of America, April 27, 2022,
https://www.voanews.com/a/uganda-company-charging/6575561.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-048 .note}
::: title
:::

48\.

"Hong Kong Disneyland Faces Tough Competition," NBC News, NBC Universal,
September 10, 2006, https://www.nbcnews.com/id/wbna14774923.
::::

:::: {#rf-049 .note}
::: title
:::

49\.

Ashley Crossman, "The Importance Customs in Society," ThoughtCo.,
Dotdash Meredith, updated November 5, 2019,
https://www.thoughtco.com/custom-definition-3026171.
::::

:::: {#rf-050 .note}
::: title
:::

50\.

"A Brief History of the Spanish Siesta,"

All about Barcelona Tourism

(blog), BCN Exclusive Private Tours, July 29, 2018,
https://barcelonaexclusiveprivatetours.com/blog/a-brief-history-of-the-spanish-siesta.
::::

:::: {#rf-051 .note}
::: title
:::

51\.

John Spacey, "21 Examples of Cultural Symbols," Simplicable Guide,
Simplicable, July 5, 2020, https://simplicable.com/en/cultural-symbols.
::::

:::: {#rf-052 .note}
::: title
:::

52\.

Spacey, "21 Examples."
::::

:::: {#rf-053 .note}
::: title
:::

53\.

Thomas Metcalf, "Marketing Blunders & Global Culture," Small Business,
Chron.com, last modified November 21, 2017,
https://smallbusiness.chron.com/marketing-blunders-global-culture-64855.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-054 .note}
::: title
:::

54\.

"11 Foods That Have Different Names in the UK and the US," Bayswater,
Eurocentres, September 13, 2016,
https://www.eurocentres.com/blog/11-foods-different-names-uk-us.
::::

:::: {#rf-055 .note}
::: title
:::

55\.

"English Idioms," Resources for Learning English, EF Education First,
accessed August 30, 2022,
https://www.ef.edu/english-resources/english-idioms/.
::::

:::: {#rf-056 .note}
::: title
:::

56\.

"10 Fascinating Idioms in Different Languages,"

TakeLessons Blog

, TakeLessons, May 13, 2016,
https://takelessons.com/blog/idioms-in-different-languages-z14.
::::

:::: {#rf-057 .note}
::: title
:::

57\.

Sian Cain, "Lizzo Removes 'Harmful' Ableist Slur from New Song Grrrls
after Criticism,"

Guardian

, June 13, 2022,
https://www.theguardian.com/music/2022/jun/14/lizzo-removes-harmful-ableist-slur-from-new-song-grrrls-after-criticism.
::::

# 

consumer income

the amount of money a household or individual earns

cultural symbols

physical representations of a culture's language, values, and traditions

cultural values

unspoken aesthetics, socialization, and religious aspects woven
throughout a culture

customs

mannerisms or behaviors that are considered characteristics within a
social system

discretionary income

the money individuals and households are left with after paying taxes
and other living expenses, such as food and shelter

disposable income

the money individuals and households are left with after paying taxes

economic infrastructure

the physical facilities of an economy that benefit product and
distribution

embargoes

trading bans on a product with a specific country; imposed between
countries that have different political ideologies

exchange rate

the rate at which one country's currency can be exchanged for that of
another country

lifestyle

the way a person or group lives

purchasing power

the goods that can be purchased with one unit of currency

quotas

maximum allowable units (usually in currency) to be imported into or
exported out of a specific country

sociocultural factors

values, behaviors, culture, lifestyle, and language that shape a
person's or group's way of living

stereotypes

oversimplified images, perceptions, or ideas of a person or group

tariffs

taxes that governments impose on imports into the country

trade blocs

intergovernmental agreements that remove barriers to trade within
regions of the world
