m00041

0031aafb-e873-463a-9406-aba1ebe7ba10

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

List the strategies used in global competition.

Discuss the different forms of global competition.

# Ways in Which an Organization Can Enter the Global Arena {#sect-00002}

After a company has decided to enter the global marketplace, managers
must determine which method of international involvement is best for the
company's strategic goals. These methods include exporting, franchising,
licensing, joint ventures, strategic alliances, and direct foreign
investment (see [\#](#)). Each method represents a different level of
involvement. Let's look at each of these in more detail.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

## Exporting {#sect-00003}

The most basic and least involved method to enter global markets is
through exporting. Exporting is when a company makes a product or
service in one country and sells it in others. Many companies choose
this method of entry into global markets because it requires the least
amount of m risk and allows the firm's managers to learn the ins and
outs of international business. For example, in the UK's East Midlands,
the county of Northampton is home to Alfred Sargent & Sons, Church's,
John Lobb, and other shoemakers. An increased emphasis on exporting
allowed these dying businesses to see new life because people in other
countries wanted a piece of traditional "English cobbling."

## Franchising {#sect-00004}

Franchising is a business strategy in which the owner (the franchisor)
allows another person or entity (the franchisee) to operate a business
using the franchisor's products, branding, and knowledge in exchange for
a fee. Over 90 percent of the McDonald's around the world are franchises
owned by independent local businesspeople. The cost to franchise a
business varies. A person interested in opening a McDonald's franchise
will need \$500,000 in liquid assets and \$45,000 for a franchise fee
and should expect to spend between \$1.3 million and \$2.3 million over
time. On the other hand, franchising the exercise brand Jazzercise
requires a one-time initial fee of \$1,250 and liability insurance.

Franchising rules and commitment vary by company for both home-based and
international markets.

## Licensing {#sect-00005}

Licensing is a contract in which one organization permits another to use
its name, brand, or trademark on its own items. While licensing and
franchising might seem similar, franchising involves all business
operations, whereas licensing applies to a specific aspect (usually
trademarked) of the business. Licensing agreements allow the company to
enter other markets without as high of a financial risk. However, with
little business involvement in licensing by the licensee (the company
licensing its brand), strong business relationships are critical in
order to reduce the risk of the licensor damaging the brand's
reputation. With licensing, the licensee loses brand control. Licensing
is common in the fashion industry, where well-known apparel brands such
as Armani license their names to companies that make eyeglass frames,
fragrances, and watches.

## Joint Venture {#sect-00006}

A joint venture is a business arrangement whereby two or more companies
create one single enterprise or project. The joint venture can last for
any length of time but typically is not permanent. The advantage of a
joint venture is that the two companies share all the risks associated
with the venture. In 2012, Kellogg's and Wilmar International Limited
announced a joint venture. Kellogg's wanted to expand its presence in
the Chinese market. Creating a joint venture with Wilmar International
provided the company with an extensive distribution network. Both
companies benefited from this venture: Wilmar International through its
financial incentives and Kellogg's with a way to penetrate the market.

## Strategic Alliance {#sect-00007}

A strategic alliance occurs when two companies from different countries
agree to invest resources in a mutually beneficial way. For example,
Microsoft relies heavily on alliances when entering new markets as a way
to optimize the knowledge and market identification of local companies.
Uber and Spotify entered into a strategic alliance to allow Uber riders
to connect to their Spotify account and stream music while catching a
ride.

## Direct Foreign Investment {#sect-00008}

The most involved and riskiest way for a business to get involved in the
international arena is through direct foreign investment. Foreign direct
investment (FDI) involves establishing operations within a foreign
country. Consider automobile manufacturers. Nearly all producers have
made significant investments in manufacturing outside of their home
countries. For example, Tesla invested in a Shanghai factory to produce
electric vehicles (EVs), and in 2022, the company announced it is
"taking steps to ramp up output in order to double its original planned
annual target to 1 million cars."

# Forms of Global Competition {#sect-00009}

Global competition can come from international firms, multinational
firms, and transnational firms. Let's look at each to better understand
their impact.

Any firm that operates on a global level is classified as an
international firm regardless of the intensity of the involvement.
International firms can further be classified as either multinational
firms or transnational firms. Often, this classification depends on the
business structure and products or services offered.

The most common characteristic of a multinational firm is its
centralized business structure. Consider Amazon, whose headquarters are
located in Seattle, Washington. Amazon operates in over 50 countries
across the globe. However, the majority of all major decisions are made
at its headquarters, making it a multinational firm.

Let's look at McDonald's again. The company's franchise strategy relies
heavily on the brand name and similar core menu items across the globe.
However, the company also allows for local responsiveness by allowing
local menu items to be included in the menu. For this reason, McDonald's
is often referred to as a transnational firm, one that allows for a
higher degree of localization.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00010}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00011}

:::: {#rf-058 .note}
::: title
:::

58\.

Laura Dixon, "Northampton's Traditional Shoemaking Revival,"

Wall Street Journal

, March 6, 2014,
https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052702304675504579391241012877548.
::::

:::: {#rf-059 .note}
::: title
:::

59\.

Adam Hayes, "Franchise," Investopedia, Dotdash Meredith, updated
September 4, 2021, https://www.investopedia.com/terms/f/franchise.asp.
::::

:::: {#rf-060 .note}
::: title
:::

60\.

"Franchising Overview," Corporate, McDonald's, accessed August 30, 2022,
https://corporate.mcdonalds.com/corpmcd/franchising-overview.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-061 .note}
::: title
:::

61\.

Lxi Lisa Goetz, "The Cost of Buying a McDonald's Franchise (MCD),"
Investopedia, Dotdash Meredith, updated June 7, 2021,
https://www.investopedia.com/articles/insights/072516/cost-buying-mcdonalds-franchise-mcd.asp.
::::

:::: {#rf-062 .note}
::: title
:::

62\.

"Details," Fitness Franchise: Dance Workout Instructor, Jazzercize,
accessed August 30, 2022, https://www.jazzercise.com/Teach/Details.
::::

:::: {#rf-063 .note}
::: title
:::

63\.

Sally Lauckner, "Franchising vs. Licensing: What's the Difference?,"
Small Business, NerdWallet, October 22, 2020,
https://www.nerdwallet.com/article/small-business/franchising-vs-licensing.
::::

:::: {#rf-064 .note}
::: title
:::

64\.

Wex, s.v. "joint venture," updated July 2021,
https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/joint_venture.
::::

:::: {#rf-065 .note}
::: title
:::

65\.

Kacey Culliney, "Kellogg Strikes Cereal and Snack Joint Venture with
Chinese Monopoly Wilmar," BakeryandSnacks, William Reed, updated
September 25, 2012,
https://www.bakeryandsnacks.com/Article/2012/09/24/Kellogg-Wilmar-joint-venture-China.
::::

:::: {#rf-066 .note}
::: title
:::

66\.

"Strategic Alliance: Meaning, Examples and Types,"

Harappa Blogs

, Harappa Learning, December 20, 2021,
https://harappa.education/harappa-diaries/strategic-alliance-meaning-examples-and-types/.
::::

:::: {#rf-067 .note}
::: title
:::

67\.

"Tesla Said Readying Its China Factory for Even Greater Volumes,"
Bloomberg, June 23, 2022,
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-06-23/tesla-said-readying-its-china-factory-for-even-greater-volumes.
::::

:::: {#rf-068 .note}
::: title
:::

68\.

Tommy Unger, "Amazon Corporate Headquarters," Maps and Buildings for
Amazon & Microsoft,
https://campusbuilding.com/b/amazon-corporate-headquarters/.
::::

:::: {#rf-069 .note}
::: title
:::

69\.

Dan Alaimo, "Amazon Dominates International Marketplace Reach," Retail
Dive, Industry Dive, September 10, 2018,
https://www.retaildive.com/news/amazon-dominates-international-marketplace-reach/531926/.
::::

:::: {#rf-070 .note}
::: title
:::

70\.

Shahil Usman, "McDonald's & Its Transnational Business Strategy,"
LinkedIn, April 4, 2020,
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/mcdonalds-its-transnational-business-strategy-shahil-usman.
::::

# 

exporting

when a firm makes a product or service in one country and sells it in
others

foreign direct investment (FDI)

the process of establishing operations within a foreign country

franchising

a business strategy in which the owner (the franchisor) allows another
person or entity (the franchisee) to operate a business using the
franchisor's products, branding, and knowledge in exchange for a fee

international firm

a company that operates on a global level regardless of intensity of
involvement

joint venture

a business arrangement whereby two or more companies create a single
enterprise or project

licensing

a contract in which one organization permits another to use its name
brand or trademark on its own items

strategic alliance

when two companies from different countries agree to invest resources in
a mutually beneficial way

transnational firm

a company that allows for a higher degree of localization
