m00042

28cd04dc-462f-46ff-abc7-e962274821d6

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Describe how marketing strategies are adapted for a global marketplace.

Summarize how global strategies affect the 4Ps of marketing.

# Adapting Marketing Strategies for the Global Marketplace {#sect-00002}

Until this point, we've mostly been learning about the bigger-picture
decisions that a company must make when deciding whether to enter the
global marketplace. Once these company-wide decisions are made,
marketing managers must determine the most effective way to market their
products in the new markets. They must determine if completely new
products or existing products will be offered in the new market.
Additionally, they must determine if the other marketing mix variables
must be adapted to the local market.

## Standardized Global Marketing {#sect-00003}

A standardized global marketing strategy is one in which a company uses
the same marketing strategy in all markets. Coca-Cola primarily uses a
standardized marketing strategy in all markets. The brand, brand name,
and iconic cursive writing in white on red background can be seen all
over the world. The advantage that Coca-Cola has in this strategy is
that the company can spread the cost of marketing over all the regions
in which it operates.

## Adapted Global Marketing {#sect-00004}

Conversely, a company may not find success in a one-size-fits-all
marketing strategy. In this case, the company may choose an adapted
global marketing strategy, one in which marketing strategies differ
among global markets. If a company chose an adapted global marketing
strategy, there would be high marketing costs associated with each of
the markets in which the company conducted business. Netflix, for
example, offers different content (movies and shows) in each of its
markets based on the customer demands in each country.

# The 4Ps of Marketing in a Global Environment {#sect-00005}

Now that the company has chosen either a standardized or adapted
marketing strategy for its global operations, it's time to consider each
of the 4Ps of global marketing---product, price, place, and promotion.

## Product {#sect-00006}

Companies entering new foreign markets have three choices surrounding
the product. They include straight product extension, product
adaptation, and product invention. Each has its own advantages and
disadvantages and levels of risk. Let's take a look:

Straight Product Extension

A straight product extension is a strategy that entails maintaining the
same product for both home and foreign markets. As you can imagine, this
is the easiest product strategy and has the same advantages as a
standardized marketing strategy. Some products are globally known and
need no modifications in order to sell them.

Product Adaptation

Product adaptation is when companies modify products to align with the
local culture. For example, Nike manufactures different styles of shoes
based on the local culture's preferences, such as the Nike Air Zoom, a
high-intensity interval training (HIIT) shoe that was released in
Australia. This particular shoe is not available in the United States
and looks quite different than other performance shoes offered in the
United States.

Consider another well-known company: McDonald's has around 38,000
franchises globally. However, not all global markets have the same
tastes as what you might expect in the United States. In fact, it often
goes beyond taste preferences and into religious and cultural norms. For
example, there are over 160 of the Golden Arches in India, but none of
them sell pork or beef, and they even keep separate kitchens for
vegetarian and meat preparations. The company announced it would be
opening vegetarian-only restaurants to better serve the Indian markets.

Product Invention

The most involved product strategy used in global marketing is that of
product invention. Product invention consists of creating entirely new
products for a global market. Consider the earlier example of the
Ugandan market. Because less than half of the population has access to
electricity, there is a potential for companies to invent new products,
such as cooling systems, that do not require electricity.

:::: {#note-00007 .note}
::: title
7-Eleven and Product Adaptation
:::

There a numerous examples of product adaptation across markets. Check
out this video on how 7-Eleven differs between American and Japanese
markets.

[US vs Japan 7-Eleven \| Food Wars \| Food Insider](#)
::::

## Price {#sect-00007}

When pricing a product in a foreign market, there are other factors to
evaluate in addition to home country considerations. Tariffs, the local
economy, shipping, and other factors need to be considered because these
will all have an impact on earnings and profit.

Do you know in which country it is the most expensive to purchase a car?
You might be surprised to hear it is Singapore. The small island country
doesn't have a lot of room to accommodate everyone having an automobile,
so the government has imposed high import taxes and yearly fees to keep
the number of automobiles down.

## Place: Distribution Channels {#sect-00008}

When marketers are considering distribution channels in foreign markets,
they may find themselves with limited options compared to their home
country. In the United States, for example, most companies find
themselves with many choices of wholesalers, retailers, and supply
chains. However, in more remote areas of the world and developing
countries, those options can be limited. Consider again our Uganda
example. Most retailers, particularly outside the capital city of
Kampala, are "mom-and-pop" stores. Additionally, there are few
transportation routes, and the ones that do exist consist mostly of dirt
roads and a few highways. Unlike the United States, it is rare to see
tractor trailers (semis) carrying containers of goods from one location
to another. Instead, taxis, motorbikes, and foot traffic are the main
modes for product transportation.

It is imperative that marketers consider the whole channel when making
distribution decisions. The whole channel refers to the design of the
international channels that incorporates all members, including the
manufacturing, retailer, and wholesaler sites as well as transportation.

Have you seen the movie *Captain* *Phillips* starring Tom Hanks? The
movie was loosely based on the true story of the Maersk Alabama
container ship that was hijacked by Somali pirates off the coast of
Somalia. Yes, pirates exist, and when they are able to capture large
cargo ships, they can loot a lot of valuable cargo. While many large
vessels avoid pirate territory when considering the whole channel,
pirates still exist today and are often waiting at sea to steal millions
of dollars' worth of goods.

## Promotion {#sect-00009}

Just as marketing managers must determine whether to adapt their product
to new markets, they must also determine the best course of action for
the promotion strategy. Nearly all promotion strategies will need to
adapt to some degree in different markets, even if it is a simple
product expansion.

Consider Coca-Cola, whose brand name remains unchanged. However, in some
countries, the slogan is slightly tweaked to have a more local meaning,
but with the same underlying promotional message. Refer to [\#](#) for
some of the Coca-Cola slogans used around the world.

  *Country*       *Slogan*
  --------------- --------------------------------------------------
  India           Always the Real Thing
  United States   Real Magic
  New Zealand     Real Magic
  Spain           Siente El Sabor (Feel the Flavor)
  Hungary         Kóstold meg az érzést (Taste the Flavor)
  Indonesia       Rasakan Keajaiban (Real Magic or Feel the Magic)

  : Coca-Cola Slogans {#table-00001}

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00010}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00011}

:::: {#rf-071 .note}
::: title
:::

71\.

"Global Marketing Strategy Guide: Tips and Examples,"

Translator's Blog

, Tomedes, January 27, 2021,
https://www.tomedes.com/translator-hub/global-marketing.
::::

:::: {#rf-072 .note}
::: title
:::

72\.

Tomedes, "Global Marketing Strategy Guide."
::::

:::: {#rf-073 .note}
::: title
:::

73\.

"Nike Zoom Running Shoes," Nike AU, Nike, accessed August 30, 2022,
https://www.nike.com/au/w/zoom-air-running-shoes-37v7jz8y8c6zy7ok.
::::

:::: {#rf-074 .note}
::: title
:::

74\.

"High Intensity Interval Training," Nike.com, Nike, accessed August 30,
2022, https://www.nike.com/w/hiit-9q3qg.
::::

:::: {#rf-075 .note}
::: title
:::

75\.

"McDonald's to Beef Up in India with Meatless Menu," CBS News, CBS
Interactive, September 5, 2012,
https://www.cbsnews.com/news/mcdonalds-to-beef-up-in-india-with-meatless-menu/.
::::

:::: {#rf-076 .note}
::: title
:::

76\.

"Access to Electricity (% of Population) -- Uganda," World Bank Open
Data, World Bank Group, accessed August 30, 2022,
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EG.ELC.ACCS.ZS?locations=UG.
::::

:::: {#rf-077 .note}
::: title
:::

77\.

"Top 10 Most Expensive Countries to Buy Cars,"

ezFEED

(blog), ezAUTO.MY, September 14, 2020,
https://ezauto.my/blog/2020/09/14/top-10-most-expensive-countries-to-buy-cars/.
::::

:::: {#rf-078 .note}
::: title
:::

78\.

"Whole Channel View," The Definition, accessed August 30, 2022,
https://the-definition.com/term/whole-channel-view.
::::

:::: {#rf-079 .note}
::: title
:::

79\.

Brian Beckcom, "Captain Phillips and the Truth about What Happened,"

Blog & News

, VB Attorneys, October 30, 2017,
https://www.vbattorneys.com/blog/maersk-alabama-and-somali-pirates-suit.
::::

:::: {#rf-080 .note}
::: title
:::

80\.

Wikipedia, s.v. "List of Coca-Cola slogans," last modified July 7, 2022,
05:41, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Coca-Cola_slogans.
::::

# 

adapted global marketing strategy

a strategy in which a company utilizes different marketing strategies in
different global markets

product adaptation

when companies modify products to align with the local culture

product invention

when companies create entirely new products for a global market

standardized global marketing strategy

a strategy in which a company uses the same marketing strategy in all
markets

straight product extension

a strategy that entails maintaining the same product for both the home
and foreign markets

whole channel

the design of the international channels that incorporates all members,
including the manufacturing, retailer, and wholesaler sites as well as
transportation
