m00043

bea698f9-dda8-4873-9d77-86985a3e9612

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify ethical issues facing global organizations.

Provide an example of a company that displays ethics in the global
marketplace.

# Identifying Ethical Issues in the Marketplace {#sect-00002}

As with all business decisions, there are ethical matters to consider
when entering into the global marketplace.

## Outsourcing {#sect-00003}

Outsourcing refers to a business moving some of its operations to a
foreign country for the purpose of saving money and time or to increase
volume and quality. WhatsApp, an encrypted communication app owned by
Meta Platforms (formerly Facebook), has been used globally for several
years. Based out of California, the company realized that it would have
difficulty growing if it did not outsource. In 2012, the company began
utilizing Russian companies for a small fraction of what it would have
had to pay within the United States. While outsourcing has its
advantages, many will argue that outsourcing eliminates jobs in the home
country.

## Work Standards and Conditions {#sect-00004}

Unlike most developed countries, those countries still developing often
have much lower standards for working conditions. This has been a topic
of hot debate for many years in the United States and around the world
as companies have moved some or all of their operations to countries
with lower standards. In Xinjiang, China, more than half a million
people from ethnic minority groups are forced to pick cotton for the
fashion industry. Well-known companies such as Nike, Apple, and Levi's
have come under the same scrutiny in more recent years. While cheaper
production costs will provide the company with more profits, more often
than not, lower standards, working conditions, and otherwise unethical
behavior will put them under a microscope. Alternately, many companies
and experts will argue that even the worst of working conditions have a
positive impact on developing nations.

## Workplace Diversity and Equal Opportunity {#sect-00005}

In recent decades, many countries have passed regulations to include and
promote diversity in the workplace. However, in other countries,
diversity and equal opportunity remain human rights issues. Having a
diverse workforce has numerous benefits, particularly in those companies
expanding globally. Companies committed to diversity have increased
chances of success in the global market; diversity often breeds an
increase in ideas and cultural intelligence and creates a more agile
workforce.

Additionally, marketers must also be considerate of diversity within
their marketing strategies. Alienating underrepresented groups of people
within a target market might not only cost sales but also backfire in
terms of representation. Procter & Gamble has utilized its many
marketing platforms to not only include diversity but also to shed light
on societal struggles of people of many racial identities in its target
markets. The company has also extended diversity into its hiring
practices to "mirror the US population."

## Child Labor {#sect-00006}

The use of child labor is seen by most Americans as unethical. The
United Nations (UN) has implemented many treaties that establish human
rights for children within member nations. However, each country has its
own standards for child labor and the minimum age at which a child can
work.

## Bribery and Corruption {#sect-00007}

Bribery and corruption may seem like a thing from the past, but in fact,
both are still quite prevalent in both developed and developing nations.
Nearly all countries have laws against bribery and corruption, but in
many areas that are politically unstable, doing business means bribing
officials. When a company decides to expand into international markets,
the managers and marketers must decide to what degree they are willing
to participate in practices that would otherwise be deemed illegal or
unethical in the home country. The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977
"was enacted for the purpose of making it unlawful for certain classes
of persons and entities to make payments to foreign government officials
to assist in obtaining or retaining business."

Dumping is a practice in which a company manufactures a very large of
number of goods and exports them to a foreign market and the product is
offered at an extremely low price to the consumer market. This often
drives out all competition in the market. Once competition is driven
out, the company then raises the price of the product, essentially
creating a monopoly on the product. The United States and other
countries have laws strictly prohibiting the practice of dumping, and
many impose fines against those companies attempting to practice
dumping.

:::: {#note-00009 .note}
::: title
Free and Fair Trade
:::

As a marketer, it's important to be aware of ethical practices. Learn
more about the United States [Department of Commerce and how it promotes
free and fair trade](#).
::::

:::: {#note-00010 .note}
::: title
Kao Corporation
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Founded in 1887 in Tokyo, Japan, Kao is a "16-time Ethisphere World's
Most Ethical Companies honoree and \[it has\] been honored every year
since Ethisphere started recognizing companies." The company's
strategies aim for zero waste when producing its cleaning and health and
beauty products. Using leftover materials, Kao developed Bio IOS, a
sustainable ingredient in its cleaning products. Its product development
process encourages consumers to use refill packs to reduce waste.

In 2022, Kao and Costco teamed up to begin testing foldable containers
that allow for repeated use as packing materials in a Kanagawa
Prefecture Costco warehouse (see [\#](#)). [To read more about this
initiative and to see the packaging, visit the Kao website](#).

The company has plans to expand the use of these reusable packing
materials into other warehouses and hopefully further into the industry.
Kao prides itself on the innovation of societal and environmentally
friendly products as well as practicing gender equality and universal
product design.
::::

#  {#sect-00008}

As outlined in this chapter, transportation, technological developments,
and business landscape and cultural considerations go hand in hand with
globalization. Marketers must develop competitive marketing strategies
in a realm far different than they're accustomed to. Decisions have
expanded to encompass complex international considerations. Once a
company has decided to enter an international marketplace, it must
decide how best to make that entry. Some companies decide to export
products, some determine a joint venture is the best approach, and
others elect to invest in building manufacturing facilities. Each offers
differing levels of investment, control, and potential profit. An
additional and vital concern is whether the company will standardize its
product offerings or shift products to adapt to cultural differences. In
any event, successful businesses select their marketing partners and
intermediaries carefully as they aim to add value global customers want.

#  {#sect-00009}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00010}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00011}

There are ways to build skills that will help you in international
markets. Consider the items shared in this chapter and consider what you
might do to enhance your skills. Then write a one-to-two-page document
outlining a plan for what you will do to improve your skills. Be
specific and include a timeline. You might also want to meet with
international business instructors to help identify areas to include.

Here are several things to consider:

Does your campus offer courses or workshops in diversity? Many diversity
training opportunities also offer a certificate of completion that you
can include in your resume.

Is there a foreign language requirement at your university? If so, this
education plus a study abroad experience will reinforce your language
skills, business etiquette, and exposure to cultural realities.
Satisfying college requirements can also work in your favor.

Political science courses offer credits toward graduation that also may
extend to the political realities of foreign countries or regions,
enhancing your awareness of business practices, economic conditions, and
historical underpinnings.

#  {#sect-00012}

Part of the International Trade Administration, Export Assistance
Centers (found in the United States, Europe, the Middle East, Africa,
and Asia) help US-based businesses plan, develop, and execute
international strategies to succeed in today's global marketplace
through the. [Find the center nearest to you](#) and conduct a short
interview with an export counselor there to learn more about their job.
To learn more about global market opportunities through the
International Trade Administration, watch the short video "Discover
Global Markets."

[Discover Global Markets: Powering & Building the Middle East &
Africa](#)

Here are some questions to ask:

What services does the center offer?

What is an "initial market check"?

Does the center provide customized market research?

Does the International Trade Administration work with US consulates and
embassies?

Are there training or networking events to attend where I can network
and learn more?

How does the export center help companies located in rural areas
successfully export products?

What training did you complete to qualify for your position?

#  {#sect-00013}

## Timmy Global Health {#sect-00014}

Founded in 1997 by Dr. Charles (Chuck) Dietzen, Timmy Global Health has
a mission to empower communities to address health disparities in a
sustainable way. For over two decades, Timmy has supported care sites
across four countries in Latin America and Africa: Guatemala, Ecuador,
the Dominican Republic, and Nigeria. Since its founding, it has served
100,000+ patients through medical service trips and local follow-up
care. The most enduring legacy is the trusting relationships it has
built with local communities.

With a vision to build a healthier world through a community of global
health leaders, Timmy has been active at more than 18 colleges and
universities throughout the United States. For two decades Timmy
organized to provide medical clinics and much-needed supplies to people
in underserved areas. All who went on the medical service trips learned
the mission of health care firsthand by tending to those who most needed
the care and resources.

Dr. Chuck founded Timmy Global Health in Greenwood, Indiana. His
reputation as a physician and his connection to schools and community
health leaders was a primary driver for his development of the
organization near the area where he lived and worked. However, it was
the spirit of giving and the generosity that Hoosiers (Indiana natives)
are known for that solidified his decision to have the organization
headquartered in Greenwood.

Through the years, Dr. Chuck provided his vision and numerous resources
to Timmy Global Health. Dr. Chuck was the biggest fundraiser and the
visionary behind many of the programs and global community connections.
Having traveled to over 30 countries himself, he knew the challenges and
the opportunities around the globe.

When Dr. Chuck founded Timmy Global Health, his idea was to have an
organization that was self-sustaining. With good leadership at the helm,
the possibilities were endless for the work that could be conducted
throughout the world. Timmy needed good leaders who had a passion for
the underserved and a willingness to work in various capacities. It
would take individuals who were interested in mission over profit.

Over the years, Timmy saw many challenges to the model of service. Good
leadership was difficult to find, and over its path from infancy to
maturity, Timmy had its share of both good leadership and poor
leadership. As a nonprofit, it was fundamental that the organization
always continue to raise money, spend conservatively, and hire people
who were service minded. Through the work it did around the globe, Timmy
was also dependent on workers in-country who could liaise with Timmy's
partner organizations.

Each country Timmy worked with had a different political and economic
system that required a network of individuals with a working knowledge
of the country. Understanding and working around operational disparities
was a job requirement for those who worked for Timmy Global Health.
Moving medicine, supplies, and people to meet the needs of the
underserved required a different set of resources in each country.

Timmy's mission was challenged in late 2019 when the COVID-19 pandemic
disrupted its global network. Forced to shut down its mission trips and
still work to support global health issues, the organization created an
updated service model with a way to empower communities to achieve their
stated health goals.

The organization had to streamline operations. It realized remote work
was at the core of what it did. To that end, the organization sold its
headquarters building, downsized its staff, and focused on building up
its financial reserves. Continuing to work with its partners in the
countries it serves, Timmy was able to pay for the salaries of local
doctors, buy essential medications and supplies, provide personal
protective equipment to clinic staff and patients, pay for the transport
of patients, train community health workers, and even start new
programs.

Looking toward the future, the organization is still exploring models of
remote work that can lead to better utilization of resources. Technology
is allowing for continued connection with the in-country partners.
College chapters are continuing to raise money and awareness and provide
local health care support for underserved communities in their own local
areas. Timmy is looking to add more college chapters in the United
States and abroad.

The COVID-19 pandemic proved that global health care affects us all. As
our world and how we work together changes, it is important to have
fluid plans to address how we operate. How we care for each other may
change, but the ability to do so should remain.

[Read more about Timmy Global Health on its website](#), [Facebook
page](#), or [Instagram account](#).

## Case Questions {#sect-00015}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00016}

:::: {#rf-081 .note}
::: title
:::

81\.

"Why Do Companies Outsource? Lessons Learned and Outsourcing Examples,"

Our Blog

, NIX United, August 24, 2020,
https://nix-united.com/blog/outsourcing-who-does-it-and-why/.
::::

:::: {#rf-082 .note}
::: title
:::

82\.

Helen Davidson, "Xinjiang: More Than Half a Million Forced to Pick
Cotton, Report Suggests,"

Guardian

, December 15, 2020,
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/dec/15/xinjiang-china-more-than-half-a-million-forced-to-pick-cotton-report-finds.
::::

:::: {#rf-083 .note}
::: title
:::

83\.

Christopher Blattman and Stefan Dercon, "Everything We Knew about
Sweatshops Was Wrong,"

New York Times

, April 27, 2017,
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/27/opinion/do-sweatshops-lift-workers-out-of-poverty.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-084 .note}
::: title
:::

84\.

Erika C. Collins, "Global Diversity and International Employment," in

The Employment Law Review

, ed. Erika C. Collins, 11th ed. (London: Law Business Research, 2020),
19--28.
::::

:::: {#rf-085 .note}
::: title
:::

85\.

Tina Yazdi, "5 Reasons Why International Success and Diversity Are
Inseparable," Amplitude, November 16, 2017,
https://amplitude.com/blog/why-diversity-and-international-success-are-inseparable.
::::

:::: {#rf-086 .note}
::: title
:::

86\.

Gillian Oakenfull, "Marketing with Cultural Intelligence for Growth and
Good,"

Forbes

, April 7, 2021,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/gillianoakenfull/2021/04/07/pg-brands-lead-with-cultural-intelligence/.
::::

:::: {#rf-087 .note}
::: title
:::

87\.

"Child Labor and the Law," Child Labor Facts, GoodWeave, accessed August
30, 2022, https://goodweave.org/the-issue/laws/.
::::

:::: {#rf-088 .note}
::: title
:::

88\.

"Foreign Corrupt Practices Act," Fraud Section (FRD), US Department of
Justice, last modified February 3, 2017,
https://www.justice.gov/criminal-fraud/foreign-corrupt-practices-act.
::::

:::: {#rf-089 .note}
::: title
:::

89\.

"Past World's Most Ethical Companies," World's Most Ethical Companies,
Ethisphere, last modified February 18, 2022,
https://worldsmostethicalcompanies.com/past-honorees/.
::::

:::: {#rf-090 .note}
::: title
:::

90\.

Nikola Gemeš, "44 of the World's Most Ethical Companies (Updated 2022),"

GreenCitizen Blog

, GreenCitizen, April 10, 2022,
https://greencitizen.com/blog/ethical-companies/.
::::

:::: {#rf-091 .note}
::: title
:::

91\.

"Kao and Costco Test the Introduction of Foldable Containers as Reusable
Packing Material," News Release, Kao, July 28, 2022,
https://www.kao.com/global/en/news/sustainability/2022/20220728-001/.
::::

:::: {#rf-092 .note}
::: title
:::

92\.

Gemeš, "World's Most Ethical Companies."
::::

:::: {#rf-093 .note}
::: title
:::

93\.

Timmy Global Health, https://www.timmyglobalhealth.org/; "Timmy Global
Health Responds to COVID-19," Timmy Global Health Blog,
https://www.timmyglobalhealth.org/blog/timmy-global-health-responds-to-covid-19;
"Wrestling at Its Finest---21

st

Annual Timmy Takedown," EinPresswire.com, September 22, 2022,
https://www.einnews.com/pr_news/592255251/wrestling-at-its-finest-21st-annual-timmy-takedown;
::::

# 

dumping

the practice in which a company manufactures a very large of number of
goods and exports them to a foreign market to see cheaply

outsourcing

the process of moving some of a business's operations to a foreign
country for the purpose of saving money and time or to increase volume
and quality
