m00116

17dcdcbc-dfd5-4771-adf2-4c87db19dc13

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

It is no surprise that retailing has changed over the years. In the
1980s and 1990s, big-box retailers such as Walmart began opening stores
in small towns and forcing local mom-and-pop shops out of business. In
the 2000s, with the rise of Internet shopping, more brick-and-mortar
retailers closed their doors. The COVID-19 pandemic resulted in another
wave of retail closures. While future prospects for a number of retail
operations appear bleak, many retailers---both new and established---are
finding innovative ways to attract customers back into the stores.

Precycle is a grocery store in the Bushwick neighborhood of Brooklyn,
New York. In order to differentiate her store from other local shops,
Precycle owner Katerina Bogatireva decided to focus her efforts on
serving a niche market of consumers who are committed to protecting the
environment. Shoppers at Precycle can find a wide variety of spices,
fruits, grains, pastas, toothbrushes, and many household basics. But
what shoppers won't find at Precycle is plastic. Bogatireva opened the
store in an effort to reduce the amount of plastic that is used in
retailing. All the items in Precycle are not only free from plastic and
sold in bulk, they are locally sourced.

Similar types of stores have been popping up throughout the United
States. Consumers are more and more aware of the ongoing problem that
plastic creates for our oceans and general environment. Additionally,
more consumers are becoming locavores, people who purchase food that is
locally grown. Local and more traditional brick-and-mortar retailers are
ideal to meet these consumer demands. Post-pandemic, we may see
increased numbers of brick-and-mortar retailers responding to these new
consumer demands. Only time will tell.

# Endnotes {#sect-00001}

:::: {#rf-001 .note}
::: title
:::

1\.

Precycle (website), accessed September 2, 2022,
https://www.precyclenyc.com/.
::::

:::: {#rf-002 .note}
::: title
:::

2\.

Kim Souza, "Nielsen: Consumers Will Want More Local Foods in 2020," Talk
Business & Politics, October 29, 2019,
https://talkbusiness.net/2019/10/nielsen-consumers-will-want-more-local-foods-in-2020/.
::::
