m00117

490e604a-2c0e-47c7-8c6b-c706e4b48359

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define retailing.

Discuss the functions of retailers in the distribution channel.

# Retailing Defined {#sect-00002}

When marketers plan their distribution strategies, they must determine
which channel is best suited to get their goods and services into the
hands of consumers. A distribution channel is a set of businesses that
move the product or service from the manufacturer to the end user or
buyer. [\#](#) outlines the most common types of distribution channels
for consumer goods. These businesses, often called intermediaries, play
important roles in the distribution of goods and services.
Intermediaries are companies that act as liaisons between the buyer and
seller. These companies can take on a variety of roles to facilitate the
transfer of products and services from a manufacturer to the end user.
The path that a product or service takes from seller to buyer, including
the intermediaries, is called the distribution or marketing channel. The
length of the channel---short or long---will depend on many factors,
including the product itself.

When you first glance at [\#](#), it might seem logical for producers to
simply provide goods and services directly to the consumer. Imagine that
you were thirsty and wanted a cold can of Pepsi. However, you did not
have any at home, and retailers did not exist. How would you get your
Pepsi? Well, without retailers, you would have to rely on either going
directly to the closest Pepsi bottling plant or requesting a Pepsi
employee to deliver a can to your home. Can you imagine how costly that
would be for PepsiCo? Now imagine doing that for every single product
you wish to purchase. Obviously, this seems implausible---and almost
laughable. While many companies have traditionally utilized longer
channels to distribute their products, companies today often use more
direct (shorter) channels or multiple channels. When a manufacturer
utilizes multiple channels to distribute its product, it's known as an
omnichannel strategy. Amazon, for example, uses multiple distribution
channels. Some products are sold directly to the consumer, while other
products come from independent retailers, who then fulfill the order.

Consider another example: You are planning a trip with your friends. You
have found a Marriott hotel that suits your needs. You may choose to
book directly with Marriott through its website or reservation phone
number. Alternatively, you may choose to book through a third party,
such as Hotels.com, or even by calling your travel agent. Marriott is
utilizing multiple channels for its service, so it is utilizing an
omnichannel distribution approach.

Today, even social media plays a role in the distribution channel.
Looking at the above example, Marriott might consider utilizing social
media as yet another point of contact for the organization's employees
and customers to interact. Customers can often book a room and receive
customer service directly through the company's social media platforms.
As you will learn later, the choice of which distribution channel to use
depends largely on the type of product and the manufacturer's strategy.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Regardless of how many channel members are included in the distribution
channel, retailing is the final stop in the channel before products and
services reach the consumer. Retailing is the process of selling goods
and services to consumers. As it relates to the distribution channel,
retailers do not often manufacture the goods being sold. Rather,
retailers buy products from the manufacturing firms or wholesalers and
resell them to the consumer. While the number of traditional
brick-and-mortar retail establishments has declined drastically over the
past few decades, retailers remain an important part of the distribution
channel. Retailing entails *all* activities involved in selling the
goods and services to the consumer; in other words, retailers have their
own marketing mix plan to accomplish their goals. Because retailing is
the final link between the manufacturer and consumer, retailers have as
much incentive to sell products as those who produce the product.

# The Functions of Retailing in the Distribution Channel {#sect-00003}

Retailing has many important functions in the distribution channel.
Consider Target, a general-merchandise retailer with stores in all 50
states and the District of Columbia, as well as locations across the
globe. Target offers a wide variety of consumer goods in each of its
large brick-and-mortar locations. In addition to what we, as consumers,
see when shopping at Target, there are many other important functions
for Target and other retailers in the distribution channel (see
[\#](#)). Let's look at these functions in detail.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

## Provide Assortment {#sect-00004}

Retailers provide assortment for consumers. Assortment simply refers to
the number of options in a given product category or the number of
products offered. Consider the Pepsi beverage example from earlier in
the chapter. What if you weren't sure which drink you wanted? Rather
than go directly to a Pepsi bottling plant, you decide to go to Target
where you will find an assortment of drink varieties and brands to
choose from.

Target also offers a wide variety of other products. So, while you are
there, you decide to purchase your drink and some home furnishings and
groceries. The assortment of brands and products in general gives the
consumer options and convenience---something most consumers value in
their busy lives.

Many large retailers also offer their own brand of products. This allows
the company to provide competing options to consumers at different price
points, typically lower than the name brands. For example, Walmart
offers various name brands of acetaminophen, one being the more popular
brand Tylenol and the other a lower-priced, comparable product labeled
Great Value. By providing multiple purchase options, the retailer is
able to target more than one consumer market.

## Buy in Bulk {#sect-00005}

Because retail establishments are often large and have ample storage,
they are able to purchase and sell items in bulk. Consider the quantity
of one product, such as Pepsi 12-packs, that Target has on its shelves.
In addition, the store has stock in the back room for when the shelves
are empty. Target's ability to buy in bulk allows it to serve a large
number of consumers at any given time.

From a broader standpoint, consider the number of Pepsi 12-packs that
the entire Target store network purchases in a given week. Target's
ability to purchase such large quantities allows it to negotiate lower
prices with PepsiCo (and other channel members). In turn, retailers can
provide consumers with lower prices than if the consumer purchased
directly from Pepsi.

## Store Inventory {#sect-00006}

The ability of retailers to hold inventory allows them to quickly
restock shelves or, in the case of Internet retailers, get the product
shipped quickly. This allows consumers the convenience of being able to
get an item as quickly as possible.

## Provide Convenience to Consumers {#sect-00007}

Retailers provide a considerable amount of convenience to consumers.
Consider the distance from your home or work to your closest retailer.
For most consumers, retailers are within a few miles. This proximity
makes retailers convenient. The process of choosing a retail location
for development has become somewhat of a science in recent decades.
There are companies that specialize in partnering with retailers to
determine the best locations for store placement. To determine
locations, things like traffic patterns and demographics are collected
and analyzed.

A second service that retailers provide is convenient hours of
operation. Consider Walmart, which has locations that are open 24 hours,
or grocery stores that are open on Thanksgiving morning for last-minute
food purchases.

Retailers also allow consumers to more closely evaluate a product for
purchase. For example, some consumers would much rather purchase
clothing items from a brick-and-mortar retailer rather than online
because they can feel the texture of the cloth and try the item on to
determine if it fits and looks good.

## Providing Services to Customers {#sect-00008}

Most retailers provide services to consumers that are not a core product
offering. For example, you can purchase groceries and household
essentials at retailers such as Walmart or Kroger, but you can also
purchase stamps, buy a lottery ticket, refill your prepaid phone
minutes, drop off mail, and in some locations get a haircut or an eye
exam and deposit a check at the bank. With the convenience of multiple
services, retailers make other tasks more convenient for consumers.

While there is an added value to the consumer to have all these services
in one location, it's also a benefit to the retailers. For example, the
hair salon located inside Walmart has the added benefit of the higher
foot traffic inside the store. Since so many consumers are already in
the store, they may be more apt to stop in for a haircut. Furthermore,
while hair salon owners or individual stylists pay rent on the space
inside Walmart, they don't have the overhead that might come with a
standalone building. The advantage of this partnership for Walmart is
that it receives additional income through the rent paid by the hair
salon. The company also may build consumer loyalty since it is providing
its consumers with additional convenience by offering these services.

## Collecting and Providing Feedback {#sect-00009}

An important factor in any distribution channel is that of member
relationships. Remember that all parties in the distribution channel
have a stake in one another's success. Because retailers are the last
link between the product and the consumer, they have a unique
opportunity to collect feedback from customers and share that with other
channel members. This can take many different forms. For example, if you
use a loyalty card at your favorite grocery retailer, your purchases are
tracked. The data collected is a wealth of information that informs a
retailer's strategy and decisions. For example, the company may use the
data to inform the type of promotions to run or coupons to offer.

Retailers also provide customer feedback to their channel partners. This
feedback can let suppliers know the demand for products and if products
are being offered at the right time and the right place. If products are
not selling well in a retail establishment, the retailer and channel
partners can look to customer feedback to determine the issue and
resolve it.

:::: {#note-00006 .note}
::: title
Distribution
:::

There is much to consider with distribution channels. Learn more about
the distribution channel types, impact of the digital age, and choosing
a distribution channel and read examples of [making distribution
channels work](#) in this article. Learn [in this article how to use
distribution](#) to a sales advantage. And while we want everything to
run smoothly, it rarely does all the time. [Learn about how things could
go wrong](#) and options for managing these situations.

Now that you've had a chance to understand what distributors do, does a
career in distribution interest you? There are several types of jobs in
distribution. Do your research and learn about the types. Start by
reading this article to [learn the differences between a distribution
manager, industrial production manager, and a purchasing manager.](#)
You will learn about the needed degree of study, necessary skills,
potential job growth, and median salary. Run a Google search on
distribution careers, and you'll be shown numerous job postings. This is
a great way to gain insight into the career specifics with multiple
companies.
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00010}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00011}

:::: {#rf-003 .note}
::: title
:::

3\.

Jason Fernando, "What Is a Distribution Channel in Business and How Does
It Work?," Investopedia, Dotdash Meredith, updated May 12, 2022,
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/d/distribution-channel.asp.
::::

:::: {#rf-004 .note}
::: title
:::

4\.

Evangelos Christou and Chryssoula Chatzigeorgiou, "Adoption of Social
Media as Distribution Channels in Tourism Marketing: A Qualitative
Analysis of Consumers' Experiences,"

Journal of Tourism, Heritage & Services Marketing

6, no. 1 (2020): 25--32, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3603355.
::::

:::: {#rf-005 .note}
::: title
:::

5\.

"Our Locations," Target Corporate, Target Brands, accessed September 2,
2022, https://corporate.target.com/about/locations.
::::

:::: {#rf-006 .note}
::: title
:::

6\.

Tony Hernández and David Bennison, "The Art and Science of Retail
Location Decisions,"

International Journal of Retail & Distribution Management

28, no. 8 (2000): 357--367, https://doi.org/10.1108/09590550010337391.
::::

:::: {#rf-007 .note}
::: title
:::

7\.

"Walmart Services," Walmart.com, accessed September 2, 2022,
https://www.walmart.com/services.
::::

# 

discount store

retailer that sells a broad range of products at lower prices than
competitors

intermediaries

companies that act as liaisons between the buyer and seller

omnichannel strategy

manufacturer strategy that uses multiple distribution channels to
distribute a product

retailing

the process of selling goods and services to consumers
