m00118

9169e283-0b5a-4e1d-aee2-efe0ac93c1e0

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Characterize various store retailers.

Characterize various non-store retailers

Retailers, in some form or another, have been around for most of human
history. As early as 800 BCE in ancient Athens, Greece, businesspeople
sold their goods in developed markets at the city's center. Throughout
history, this type of business has grown and become more specialized
based on the needs of customers and the ability we now have to travel
fairly easily. Today, retailers are often defined by their product
lines---a group of products that are related to one another. Retailers
are broken into two main categories, store or non-store retailers, which
are further broken into retail types. Retail types are defined by their
product lines. See [\#](#) for a breakdown of retail types, the typical
product focus for that retail type, and examples of retailers that fall
into that type.

+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| *Retail Type*        | *Product Focus*      | *Example*            |
+======================+======================+======================+
| *Store Retailers*    |                      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Specialty Store      | Single product line  | AutoZone             |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Department store     | Wide variety of      | JCPenney, Kohl's     |
|                      | product lines        |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Supermarket          | Multiple product     | Publix, Kroger, Save |
|                      | lines; focused       | A Lot                |
|                      | mostly on grocery    |                      |
|                      | with limited         |                      |
|                      | services             |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Superstore           | Combination of       | Target, Walmart      |
|                      | supermarket and      |                      |
|                      | department store     |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Convenience Store    | Limited range of     | 7-Eleven, Speedway   |
|                      | everyday items       |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Category killer      | Very large           | Best Buy, Lowe's,    |
|                      | superstores with     | Home Depot, Staples, |
|                      | wide product lines   | Office Depot         |
|                      | within a category    |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Discount store       | Broad range of       | Dollar General,      |
|                      | products with few or | Dollar Tree, Family  |
|                      | no services          | Dollar               |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Off-price retailer   | Brand name           | T.J.Maxx, Ross       |
|                      | overstock,           |                      |
|                      | irregulars, and      |                      |
|                      | closeouts            |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Factory outlet       | Overstock or         | Sawgrass Mills       |
|                      | over-manufactured    | Factory Outlet,      |
|                      | brand-name items,    | Indiana Premium      |
|                      | usually clothing;    | Outlets, Osage       |
|                      | typically in a mall  | Outlets; Hanes       |
|                      | setting with other   | Outlet, L.L.Bean     |
|                      | factory outlets      | Outlet               |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Warehouse club       | Bulk items at        | Sam's Club, BJ's,    |
|                      | discount for paid    | Costco               |
|                      | membership           |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| *Non-store           |                      | Vending machines,    |
| retailers*           |                      | direct-mail          |
|                      |                      | catalogs, television |
|                      |                      | home shopping        |
|                      |                      | online,              |
|                      |                      | telemarketing,       |
|                      |                      | direct selling       |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Automatic vending    | Unmanned with very   | Snack and beverage   |
|                      | limited product line | machines in a        |
|                      | located in places    | hospital waiting     |
|                      | store retailers are  | room                 |
|                      | not                  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Direct mail and      | Limited product      | Tiffany & Co.'s Blue |
| catalogs             | lines advertised     | Book, L.L.Bean,      |
|                      | through the mail     | Fingerhut            |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Television home      | Limited product      | Home Shopping        |
| shopping             | lines advertised on  | Network, QVC         |
|                      | television           |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Online retailing     | Can be wide or       | Amazon               |
|                      | limited product      |                      |
|                      | lines of products    |                      |
|                      | offered for sale via |                      |
|                      | the Internet         |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Telemarketing        | Very limited product |                      |
|                      | line sold via the    |                      |
|                      | telephone            |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Direct selling       | Very limited product | Kirby Vacuums (B2C)  |
|                      | line sold by         |                      |
|                      | salespeople who are  | Publishing companies |
|                      | very knowledgeable   | (B2B)                |
|                      | about the product    |                      |
|                      | and sell directly to | Technology companies |
|                      | a business or end    | (B2B)                |
|                      | user; used in B2C,   |                      |
|                      | but more often in    |                      |
|                      | B2B                  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

: Types of Retailers {#table-00001}

# Store Retailers {#sect-00002}

Retailers tend to be the easiest of the channel members to identify
because we see them everywhere we go, both in person and online. A store
retailer is a traditional brick-and-mortar establishment where products
are displayed for customers to purchase. Store retailers can be
categorized in many ways based on their strategy mix, which includes a
combination of store hours, location, product assortment, and prices.

As the number of store retailers has decreased significantly over the
years due to their higher operating costs, some companies have found
more innovative ways to provide their products in a similar setting. For
example, Amazon Go is a store retailer that allows customers to shop
in-store, but has eliminated the use of cashiers (and long lines). As
customers choose the products they want, the automated store keeps track
of the purchase and charges the customers when they exit the store.

## Specialty Stores {#sect-00003}

Specialty stores focus on selling a single type of product or a single
product line. The employees of specialty stores are often very
knowledgeable about the products they sell and offer high levels of
customer service. For example, when you need a new battery in your car,
you may head straight to AutoZone, a retailer specializing in vehicle
parts. When you arrive, an associate will be able to assist you in
choosing the correct battery for the make and model of your car, and
sometimes, they may be able to install it for you.

## Department Stores {#sect-00004}

Department stores are typically larger than specialty stores and have
separate areas or departments for similar product lines. For example,
areas could include shoes, kids' clothing, housewares, and so on. Each
compartmentalized area may mimic the look and feel of a specialty store
to make for a more intimate experience, but often the sales associates
are not highly trained in each area. For example, Kohl's, a department
store chain in the United States, has separate departments containing
women's fashion, shoes, kitchenware, and toys.

## Supermarkets {#sect-00005}

A supermarket is defined as a store that mostly focuses on a product mix
of grocery items but also carries household and personal items and
offers limited services. One example is Publix, an employee-owned
supermarket chain that opened in 1930 and has nearly 1,000 stores in the
southeastern United States. Publix's average retail size is roughly
32,000 square feet, and more than 50 percent of its shelves are
dedicated to grocery items. The other 50 percent consists of cleaning
items, toiletries, over-the-counter medicines, beer/liquor, and personal
hygiene products. Like most supermarkets, Publix also offers a deli, a
bakery, hot food bars, a pharmacy, some apparel, and sometimes even pool
supplies, toys, and other nonfood items.

## Convenience Stores {#sect-00006}

Named for their convenient location, a convenience store is a small
retail business that stocks a limited range of everyday items, such as
groceries, snacks, soft drinks, tobacco, toiletries, and lottery tickets
(see [\#](#)). In the United States, convenience stores are most often
linked to gas stations. Convenience stores offer consumers the
convenience of stopping to fill up their tank and running inside for a
few essential items without having to drive to a supermarket or other
retailer. The first convenience store in the United States opened in
Texas in 1927 and later became known as 7-Eleven. In 2020, there were
approximately 150,000 convenience stores in the United States.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

## Superstores {#sect-00007}

Superstores are very large retailers that have characteristics of both
supermarkets and department stores (see [\#](#)). Like supermarkets,
they sell a wide range of grocery items. But they also have considerable
space dedicated to nonfood departments, as do department stores. Target
operates 1,927 retail stores in the United States. Some of its stores
are considered superstores, where consumers can purchase not only
(nearly) everything on their grocery list, but also clothing, household
goods, electronics, toys, and sporting equipment.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

## Category Killers {#sect-00008}

Category killers are large superstores or big-box retailers that are
bigger, cheaper, and more convenient than other types of stores. Because
of their sheer size, they have the advantage of buying products in very
large quantities, which gives them a strong negotiation position for the
price they pay to distributors. In turn, they can then offer discounted
prices to consumers. These stores are called category killers because
they often put nearby specialty stores out of business. Home Depot and
Lowe's are considered category killers because of their exhaustive
inventory selection and low prices. The popularity of this big-box
format means that smaller hardware stores may find it difficult to
compete.

## Discount Stores {#sect-00009}

During the 2008 recession, many retailers began closing their doors. But
Dollar General was one retailer that saw exponential growth during this
time. Dollar General and competitor Dollar Tree are discount
stores---stores that sell a broad range of products at lower prices than
competitors. While discount stores offer lower prices and often less
variety than competitors, they often also offer fewer services and
little customer service. As inflation put pressure on household budgets
in 2022, shoppers from a range of income levels turned to dollar stores
to save money on everyday necessities.

:::: {#note-00007 .note}
::: title
Dollar Stores and the Community
:::

Learn more about the impact dollar stores have on the community and
commerce. It's not always positive. Experts speak in this video about
the potential negative impact and issues.

[Deal or no deal? The expansion of Dollar Stores](#)
::::

## Off-Price Retailers {#sect-00010}

Retailers that provide high-quality, name-brand goods at deeply
discounted prices are considered off-price retailers. These retailers
often purchase brand names that are irregular, closeouts, overstock, and
off-season. While these retailers offer goods within more than one
product line, often consumers cannot be guaranteed to find the same
brand or item(s) in a store twice. T.J.Maxx, one of the largest clothing
retailers in the country, utilizes this strategy. The company's buyers
purchase over-ordered or over-manufactured products from distributors at
deeply discounted prices. This merchandise is then offered to the
consumer at lower prices than can be found in department stores.

## Factory Outlets {#sect-00011}

In some ways, factory outlets are similar to off-price retailers (see
[\#](#)). The goods found in factory outlets are typically
over-manufactured and sold at lower prices. However, factory outlet
goods are sold directly from the manufacturer rather than through a
third party. Many clothing manufacturers have factory outlets, which are
typically clustered together in a factory outlet mall, a space where
numerous factory outlets are located. For example, you may see Coach,
Gap, or Lands' End stores in outlet malls. Sawgrass Mills Factory
Outlet, located in Sunrise, Florida, is the largest factory outlet mall
in the United States. It houses over 350 factory outlet stores,
including Adidas, LEGO, and Zales.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

## Warehouse Clubs {#sect-00012}

Warehouse clubs (see [\#](#)) are a type of retailer that sells goods in
bulk at discounted prices to members only. Shoppers must first become
members of the warehouse club before they are allowed to purchase.
Costco and Sam's Club are two of the largest warehouse clubs in the
United States, and both offer a limited variety of perishable and
nonperishable goods. Warehouse clubs operate out of enormous, no-frills,
low-cost facilities that resemble warehouses.

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

# Non-store Retailers {#sect-00013}

Non-store retailers are those retailers that operate outside of the
traditional brick-and-mortar location. There are six main types of
non-store retailers, and we will examine each in the following sections.

## Automatic Vending {#sect-00014}

Also referred to as vending machines, automatic vending is the use of an
electronic device that dispenses a product (see [\#](#)). There is no
direct human contact in the transaction. Traditionally, automatic
vending machines would dispense items such as potato chips, candy, and
soft drinks. However, more recently, companies have found automatic
vending to be successful with other items, from cell phones to hot meals
to automobiles. Carvana is an automatic vending non-store retailer.
Using Carvana, consumers can purchase their cars online, complete with
financing, and pick up their vehicles at one of its vending machines or
have it delivered with little or no human interaction needed. Debuting
its 27th car vending machine in Atlanta, Georgia, in 2020 Carvana now
has a location that is 12 stories high and holds 43 vehicles. The
company unveiled its first car vending machine in 2012, taking
automobile shopping---and automatic vending---to a whole new level!

<figure id="fig-00005">

</figure>

## Direct Mail and Catalogs {#sect-00015}

Direct mail involves solicited or unsolicited advertising of products
and services to prospective customers through the mail ([\#](#)). Direct
mail and catalogs are likely the oldest form of non-store retailing. The
first mail-order catalog in the United States was Tiffany & Co.'s *Blue
Book* in 1845. The company still uses catalogs in addition to store
retail locations, and the catalogs feature some of the rarest diamonds
and jewels in the world. A more popular mail-order catalog that began in
the 1800s was the Sears Roebuck and Co. catalog, the "big book," which
came to feature hundreds of pages of products offered by the company;
the last was published in 1993. With the rise of the Internet, catalogs
and direct mail are not as prevalent in marketing today, but it is still
a retailing strategy that works for many companies.

<figure id="fig-00006">

</figure>

## Television Home Shopping {#sect-00016}

Another example of a non-store retailer is television home shopping.
Television home shopping primarily targets women over the age of 40 and
is a business practice in which products or services are sold via
television. There are some cable network stations that are dedicated
solely to home shopping 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. One example is
QVC, which stands for Quality, Value, and Convenience. The company was
founded in 1986 and purchased its rival Home Shopping Network (HSN) in
2017. It generated \$14.1 billion in profits in 2018. The 2015 Hollywood
movie *Joy*, starring Jennifer Lawrence, showcases real-life
entrepreneur Joy Mangano and the power of QVC as a non-store retailer.

Similar to online shopping, consumers can order products directly from a
company via telephone or the Internet. Unlike the Internet and
direct-mail catalogs, however, viewers can see the product being
demonstrated or modeled in real time. While QVC hosts are demonstrating
products, control room employees are able to monitor sales in real time
as they are placed.

## Online Retailing {#sect-00017}

Online retailing allows consumers to search and purchase products
remotely over the Internet. Although the Internet's public birthday is
debatable, online retailing started shortly thereafter. Though Amazon
(started by Jeff Bezos in 1995 as a book retailer) was not the first
online retailer, its inception prompted thousands of companies to follow
suit. In 2021, US consumers spent \$5.4 trillion at online retail
stores, a figure that is expected to increase. It is anticipated that,
by 2023, online shopping will make up 22 percent of retail sales across
the globe.

## Telemarketing {#sect-00018}

Telemarketing is the attempted sale or marketing of goods and services
to potential customers via telephone. The telephone has been used as a
sales tool since shortly after its invention. The 1970s, however, was
the decade when technology became advanced enough that call centers---a
centralized location or department that handles calls from
customers---became an economical way of contacting potential customers.
Over the next few decades, telemarketing became a staple in marketers'
strategies. But this resulted in consumers being annoyed with these
calls and a rise in scamming calls, particularly those targeting the
elderly. In 1991, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) addressed this
problem with new rules for telemarketers, but it was not until 2003 that
the Do Not Call Registry was created. Even with these changes,
legitimate and non-legitimate telemarketing finds its way onto phones.
While many (legitimate) companies still utilize this form of non-store
retailing, telemarketing is generally used (and more widely accepted) in
business-to-business (B2B) settings.

## Direct Selling {#sect-00019}

Direct selling is selling products and services directly to the consumer
in a non-retail setting. Direct selling typically consists of a
salesperson attempting to sell a product or service to a potential
customer at their residence or place of employment. This practice was
very popular in the 1950 and 1960s when women were often stay-at-home
mothers and/or homemakers. Salespeople would bring the product---a
vacuum, for example---to the consumer's home and demonstrate its
benefits in an attempt to make a sale. With the rise of two-income
families and the Internet, direct selling is not used frequently today
in the consumer market. It is, however, still a widely used practice in
B2B. However, it remains effective for some companies, such as Kirby,
which still sends salespeople door-to-door to sell its vacuums.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00020}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00021}

:::: {#rf-008 .note}
::: title
:::

8\.

Susan Meyer, "The History and Evolution of Retail Stores: From Mom and
Pop to Online Shops,"

BigCommerce Blog

, BigCommerce, last modified July 15, 2022,
https://www.bigcommerce.com/blog/retail/.
::::

:::: {#rf-009 .note}
::: title
:::

9\.

"Retail Industry Sectors: Types of Retail," Domain (Industry)
Knowledgebase, TechnoFunc, accessed September 2, 2022,
https://www.technofunc.com/index.php/domain-knowledge/retail-industry/item/retail-industry-sectors-types-of-retail.
::::

:::: {#rf-010 .note}
::: title
:::

10\.

"Amazon Go," Amazon.com, accessed September 2, 2022,
https://www.amazon.com/b?ie=UTF8&node=16008589011.
::::

:::: {#rf-011 .note}
::: title
:::

11\.

"Company Overview," Corporate Homepage, Publix Super Markets, accessed
September 2, 2022,
https://corporate.publix.com/about-publix/company-overview.
::::

:::: {#rf-012 .note}
::: title
:::

12\.

"About NACS," NACS, accessed September 2, 2022,
https://www.convenience.org/About-NACS.
::::

:::: {#rf-013 .note}
::: title
:::

13\.

Daniel Gross, "The Almighty Dollar (Store)," Slate, June 13, 2009,
https://slate.com/business/2009/06/dollar-general-is-the-retail-store-that-figured-out-how-to-beat-the-recession.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-014 .note}
::: title
:::

14\.

"About Sawgrass Mills," Sawgrass Mills, Simon Property Group, accessed
September 2, 2022, https://www.simon.com/mall/sawgrass-mills/about.
::::

:::: {#rf-015 .note}
::: title
:::

15\.

"Carvana Debuts Flagship Car Vending Machine in Atlanta," Investor
Relations, Carvana, November 18, 2020,
https://investors.carvana.com/news-releases/2020/11-18-2020-110046117.
::::

:::: {#rf-016 .note}
::: title
:::

16\.

"10 Oldest Mail Order Catalogs in the World," Oldest.org, last modified
May 17, 2022, https://www.oldest.org/artliterature/mail-order-catalogs/.
::::

:::: {#rf-017 .note}
::: title
:::

17\.

Jake Rossen, "15 Things You Might Not Know about QVC,"

Mental Floss

, August 12, 2015,
https://www.mentalfloss.com/article/67266/14-things-you-might-not-know-about-qvc.
::::

:::: {#rf-018 .note}
::: title
:::

18\.

Carmen Ang, "Timeline: Key Events in the History of Online Shopping,"
Visual Capitalist, updated October 6, 2021,
https://www.visualcapitalist.com/history-of-online-shopping/.
::::

:::: {#rf-019 .note}
::: title
:::

19\.

"Do Not Call," Federal Communications Commission, last modified June 22,
2016, https://www.fcc.gov/general/do-not-call.
::::

# 

automatic vending

the use of an electronic device that dispenses a product

category killers

large superstores, most often chains stores, that are bigger, cheaper,
and more convenient than competitors

convenience store

a small retail business that stocks a limited range of everyday items
such as groceries, snacks, soft drinks, tobacco, toiletries, and lottery
tickets

department stores

larger retailers that have separated areas---or departments---for
similar product lines

direct mail

solicited or unsolicited advertising of products and services to
prospective customers through the mail

direct selling

a marketing strategy that involves selling products and services
directly to the consumer in a non-retail setting

factory outlets

retailers that offer overstocked merchandise at discounted prices

non-store retailers

retailers that operate outside of traditional brick-and-mortar locations

off-price retailers

retailers that provide high-quality goods at lower prices

online retailing

a business model that allows consumers to search and purchase products
remotely over the Internet

specialty stores

retailers that focus on selling a single type of product or a single
product line

store retailer

a traditional brick-and-mortar establishment where products are
displayed for customers to purchase

supermarket

retailer that mostly focuses on a product mix of grocery items but also
carries household and personal items and offers limited services

superstores

very large retailers that have characteristics of both supermarkets and
department stores

telemarketing

the attempted sale, or marketing, of goods and services to potential
customers via telephone

television home shopping

a business practice in which products or services are sold via
television

warehouse clubs

retailers that sell goods in bulk at discounted prices
