m00119

92829bd8-3171-4718-ba4a-91bfb8808ecf

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Describe how pricing affects retail strategy decisions.

Explain how location is a factor in retail strategy decisions.

Discuss the importance of retailer communications.

Explain how merchandise affects retail strategy decisions.

# Retailing Strategy Decisions {#sect-00002}

Retail marketers and other retail business leaders need to determine
which retail strategy will work best for the products they sell. Recall
that retailers often buy in bulk, break down that bulk into smaller
units, and sell to the end consumer. As you may also recall, *value*
refers to a perceived worth of a product based on its service, price,
and utility provided. As marketers are determining the optimal strategy
for the products and services being offered, value again becomes an
important factor.

The three most important items to consider in retail strategy that
factor directly into value are pricing, location, and merchandise (see
[\#](#)). Because retailers sell goods and services often produced by
another company, communication with channel members is another important
topic. Let's look at retail strategy decisions more closely.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# Retail Pricing {#sect-00003}

Retailers will determine the price for their product based on many
factors, including their cost to purchase the product, shipping,
storing, and other overhead expenses associated with the business. For
store retailers, overhead expense is typically much higher than it is
for online retailers considering the brick-and-mortar location,
decoration of the store, storage, employee salaries, shrinkage (loss due
to spoilage and theft), and other factors. The goal of the retailer,
just like any for-profit business, is to make money; therefore,
retailers must consider not only their own cost of doing business, but
what consumers are willing to pay for the products and services they
sell.

## Markup {#sect-00004}

Markup is the additional amount added to the price retailers purchase
goods for. Often conveyed as a percentage, markup is the retail selling
price minus the initial purchase price, divided by the initial purchase
price, times 100. Here is the formula:

$${Markup}~{Percentage} = \left( \frac{{Selling}~{Price} - {Purchase}~{Price}}{{Purchase}~{Price}} \right)~ \times ~100$$

For example, say you manage a footwear retailer. You are interested in
selling a new line of tennis shoes that you purchase for \$50 a pair.
You decide to sell these new sneakers to consumers for \$75 a pair. What
is your markup?

Your markup is 50%, as shown here:

$${Initial}{Markup} = \left( \frac{\$ 75 - \$ 50}{\$ 50} \right) \times 100 = 50\%$$

The easiest way many retailers choose a markup is to use a strategy that
doubles the wholesale price, known as keystone pricing. Generally
speaking, retailers tend to mark up prices somewhere around 50%.
However, this can vary greatly from industry to industry. For example,
retail grocers have a markup of around 15%, while clothing is generally
marked up anywhere from 100% to 300%.

## Original and Maintained Markup {#sect-00005}

There is a difference in markup from when it's originally set to what is
actually realized when the product sells. Using the shoe retail business
example, you determined your markup is 50%. This is known as the
original markup, the markup that you have decided upon at the *onset* of
placing the shoes for sale, which includes the original price to
purchase the shoes and the cost of the shoes to the consumer. Using the
above shoe store example, your original markup percentage is 50%.

What price the product actually sells for is considered the maintained
markup. In your shoe store, let's say you anticipated selling 100 pairs
of shoes this month, but you only sold 75. As such, your original markup
has been decreased. The maintained markup is the *actual* markup
realized on the product that is sold to the consumer. It is the
difference between the cost of goods sold and the *actual* retail price
of the goods when sold. It is based on actual sales, not planned sales.

## Markdowns {#sect-00006}

Maintained markup also accounts for markdowns, which were not factored
into the original markup. A markdown is a price decrease for a product
that is at the end of its life cycle or season. Markdowns assist
retailers in selling through inventory by increasing temporary demand
for products through a lower-price offering. If there is low demand for
the 25 pairs of tennis shoes remaining in your inventory, you may
consider marking them down to \$60, then again to \$50, and so on.
Ideally, markdowns will, at the very least, cover the wholesale cost of
the goods. Markdowns lower the maintained markup and the retailer's
gross profit.

## Gross Margin {#sect-00007}

Gross margin refers to the actual sales dollars received (net sales)
minus the cost of goods sold. It is the amount of profit made before
deducting selling, general, and administrative cost and is calculated as
a percentage. Let's say that you sold 75 pairs of shoes at \$80 but had
to mark down the remaining 25 pairs to \$50 a pair. To determine your
gross margin, you calculate net sales and deduct the cost of goods sold.
Here is the net sales formula:

$$\begin{matrix}
{75~{pairs}~{of}~{shoes}~ \times ~\$ 80 = {\text{\$6,000}~{in}~{net}~{sales}}} & & \\
{25~{pairs}~{of}~{shoes}~ \times ~\$ 50 = \text{\$1,250}~{in}~{net}~{sales}} & & 
\end{matrix}$$

$$\mathbf{Total}~\mathbf{net}~\mathbf{sales}~ = ~\$ 6,000~ + ~\$ 1,250~ = ~\textbf{\$7,250}$$

The cost of goods sold (COGS) calculation is as follows:

$${COGS} = ~100~{pair}~{of}~{shoes}~ \times ~\$ 40~ = ~\$ 4,000$$

The gross margin calculation is as follows:

$${Margin} = \$ 7,250~{total}~{net}~{sales} - \$ 4,000~{cost}~{of}~{goods}~{sold}$$

That is your gross profit.

Then Gross Profit of \$3,250÷total net
sales \$7,250=0.4483×100=44.83% Proft Margin

# Store Location {#sect-00008}

An age-old saying in retailing and real estate is that the three most
important variables in choosing where to establish a business are
location, location, and location. If consumers cannot find or easily
access a store retailer, they will not spend their time looking but
instead will take their business elsewhere.

Retailers will look at location selection from many angles, including
how far away a competitor is located, how many of the same store (for
chain stores) are within a certain driving distance, how many miles the
average consumer would have to drive to reach the location, and how easy
it is to access the location. For example, if you live in a smaller,
rural town, there may be a regular Walmart but not a Walmart
Supercenter. Why? Consider the population size of your town, the number
of competitors, and how close the nearest Walmart Supercenter is
located. Retailers such as Walmart know exactly the distance consumers
are willing to drive to do their shopping. Perhaps there is a Walmart
Supercenter within the distance they know consumers are willing to
drive, so they have no need to add one to your town.

In determining location, retailers also must decide if their business is
better suited to a freestanding location, a business district or strip
mall, or another type of location. Let's examine several types of
locations.

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
Success in Small Towns
:::

With the rise of large retailers such as Walmart, smaller mom-and-pop
stores have struggled to compete in the last few decades. In small towns
and rural areas, this has presented an economic problem. However, some
retailers are finding new success in locating in these areas. Watch this
clip on how Dollar Stores is finding its niche in towns where many other
retailers have closed their doors.

[Deal or no deal? The expansion of Dollar Stores](#)
::::

## Central Business District {#sect-00009}

A central business district (CBD) is the commercial and business center
of a given city or town (see [\#](#)). While it is usually centrally
located, its chief characteristic is its proximity to the largest number
of people. Manhattan is the world's largest central business district.
One of New York City's five boroughs, Manhattan is home to dozens of
neighborhoods and hundreds of businesses, tourist attractions, and
retail establishments. It has the highest retail rent in the world. In
smaller towns and cities, these downtown areas slowly started to decline
with the growth of larger nearby cities. However, many cities are now
working hard to restore their downtown and town square areas and turn
central business districts into thriving areas once again.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

## Regional Shopping Centers {#sect-00010}

Regional shopping centers, commonly referred to as shopping malls, offer
general merchandise or fashion-oriented products and services (see
[\#](#)). They are enclosed buildings with access to retailers through a
common walkway. Most regional malls have one to four anchor
stores---large, well-known department stores---and numerous smaller
specialty stores, as well as restaurants and activities. This blend of
shopping and entertainment is sometimes known as retailtainment. For
example, the Mall of America, located in Minneapolis, Minnesota, houses
not only department and specialty stores, but also numerous restaurants,
a cinema, an aquarium, and a theme park.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

Regional shopping centers typically service consumers who live anywhere
from 5 to 15 miles away. Regional shopping centers are becoming scarcer
due to retailers moving into strip malls, an increase in Internet
shopping, and the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. It is not unusual to
see regional shopping centers primarily deserted (sometimes called
"zombie malls") or transformed into non-retail office space.

## Strip Malls {#sect-00011}

Strip malls are classified by an attached row of retail stores offering
both products and services (see [\#](#)). Consumers enter stores from
outside the building, and unlike in regional shopping centers, there is
no internal walkway that links storefronts. Rather, there is a sidewalk
running in front of and connecting the individual stores. Strip malls
often service neighborhoods within one mile of their location, and
stores are generally the same size as one another.

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

While strip malls are as old as regional shopping centers, they did not
become more popular than regional centers until the late 1990s. The
biggest draw to strip malls for consumers was that they did not have to
walk through an entire regional shopping center to reach one store, yet
could shop at multiple stores if desired. Department stores, factory
outlets, and off-price retailers are often found in strip malls, along
with specialty stores, service-oriented retail businesses, and
restaurants.

## Freestanding Retail Location {#sect-00012}

Freestanding retail locations are those store retailers that are not
attached to any other retailer or establishment. Freestanding locations
are more prevalent in smaller, less-populated areas (due to space). Gas
stations, convenience stores, and superstores often occupy freestanding
locations because they do not need anchors to pull consumers in.
Freestanding locations are often less expensive to buy or lease as they
are not anchored to established prime retail. In addition, retailers
that choose a freestanding location often have fewer restrictions on
design of the location, unlike those required of strip mall operators.
On the other hand, these locations lack the foot traffic that may be
gained from other types of retailers.

Aside from the physical location of the retailer, decisions about
exactly how the store is laid out and where products will be shelved is
equally important. When you enter a grocery store, for example, you may
note that the customer service center is often toward the front,
allowing quick access to the services provided. You may also note that
the milk, one of the most-purchased products in grocery stores, is often
located in the back of the store. If it is purchased so frequently, why
put it in the back? Most likely consumers will grab a few other items on
their way to or from the back of the store, increasing the dollars
spent.

Even the atmosphere of the retail location has been studied by retailers
over the years. What does it smell like? What is the temperature? What
music is playing? How is it decorated? Each of these considerations
plays an important overall role in developing a retailing strategy based
on the target market.

# Omnichannel Marketing {#sect-00013}

Omnichannel marketing refers to an integrated approach and cooperation
by the various channels to ensure a consistent brand message to
customers. Consider Starbucks and its mobile app. The Starbucks mobile
rewards app is designed for customers to have a similar experience to
that of walking inside the store or even visiting its website. Utilizing
an omnichannel strategy provides many advantages to both the consumer
and company that might be otherwise more difficult to achieve.
Omnichannel marketing provides increased access to products and improved
brand visibility and allows for more personalization. This provides
customers with a consistent experience with the brand regardless of
where they experience it.

Customers continue to look for ways to order products online,
particularly as the world became more accustomed to purchasing from home
during COVID-19 lockdowns. This has required the companies within
distribution channels to reassess the way products and services get to
the consumer. An omnichannel approach allows organizations to maximize
the shopping experience for the consumer by integrating multiple
delivery and engagement options.

:::: {#note-00010 .note}
::: title
Omnichannel Revolution
:::

Consumers have high expectations of their online and in-person
retailers. Learn from this TED Talk about the future of retailing from
an eyewear company that is looking to revolutionize the retail
experience.

[Omnichannel: Retail (R)evolution \| Kilian Wagner \| TEDxHSG](#)

Also read about [how you can use omnichannel experiences](#) to create
profits and the difference between omnichannel and multichannel
experiences.
::::

# Retailer Communication {#sect-00014}

Retailers communicate to both their consumers and other channel members.
The communication to consumers must be clear and concise to let
potential customers know exactly what is being offered. While retailers
develop communication strategies to directly reach their consumers, they
will also collaborate on communication strategies with channel partners.
For example, a Target commercial may feature a sale on Kellogg's cereal.
The retailer and the manufacturer have worked together on a joint
message for the consumer. Consider a second example. When you walk into
a bookstore and see the latest release of a popular author's book in the
front of the store display, the bookstore and the publisher have
collaborated on all elements of that display: signage, how the book
story is conveyed, display setup, etc.

This upward flow of communication is also important in a distribution
channel. Retailers are on the front line of the exchange with consumers.
Therefore, they can relay communication regarding products upward to
other channel members. Assume a product that is sold primarily at
retailers is being returned frequently because consumers are confused
about how to use it. This information can be relayed back to the
manufacturer, and the two can work together to overcome this challenge.
It's important to remember that every member of the channel is in
business to make money and add value to other channel members, so the
more communication and cooperation the channel members have with one
another, the more likely it is that they will all enjoy success.

# Merchandise {#sect-00015}

Coupled with location and price, the choice of retail strategy will
largely depend on the type of merchandise being offered to the consumer.
Merchandise is simply the goods that are being offered for sale by a
retailer. For large superstores, merchandise can include hundreds or
thousands of pieces of merchandise, while smaller specialty stores stock
narrow but deep product lines.

Retailers pay close attention to their choice of merchandise in terms of
category management. Category management refers to a grouping of similar
products into categories based upon consumer usage. The concept allows
marketers to decrease competition between similar products and also buy
similar product bundles at lower cost. Most retail chain stores use
category management as a way to lower costs. For example, suppose a
retailer has 20 stores across the country. Rather than having a buyer
from each location analyze prices and find the best supplier for their
location, a centralized group of people negotiates prices and contracts
for all retail locations. The time and money that the retailer saves add
up when done for all or most products carried.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00016}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00017}

:::: {#rf-020 .note}
::: title
:::

20\.

Patrick Gleeson, "What Is a Normal Markup Percentage?," Small Business,
Chron.com, updated March 8, 2019,
https://smallbusiness.chron.com/normal-markup-percentage-80750.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-021 .note}
::: title
:::

21\.

Janette Sadik-Khan, "A Plea for Fifth Avenue,"

New York Times

, January 9, 2017,
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/09/opinion/a-plea-for-fifth-avenue.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-022 .note}
::: title
:::

22\.

Mall of America (website), MOAC Mall Holdings, accessed September 2,
2022, https://www.mallofamerica.com/.
::::

:::: {#rf-023 .note}
::: title
:::

23\.

"U.S. Shopping-Center Classification and Characteristics," ICSC,
International Council of Shopping Centers, January 2017,
https://www.icsc.com/uploads/research/general/US_CENTER_CLASSIFICATION.pdf.
::::

:::: {#rf-024 .note}
::: title
:::

24\.

International Council of Shopping Centers, "U.S. Shopping-Center
Classification."
::::

:::: {#rf-025 .note}
::: title
:::

25\.

Shari Waters, "Pros and Cons of the Different Types of Retail
Locations," LiveAbout, Dotdash Meredith, updated February 6, 2020,
https://www.thebalancesmb.com/types-of-retail-locations-2890244.
::::

:::: {#rf-026 .note}
::: title
:::

26\.

"What Is Omnichannel Marketing: Definition, Tips, and Examples,"
Marketing Evolution, accessed September 2, 2022,
https://www.marketingevolution.com/knowledge-center/topic/marketing-essentials/omnichannel.
::::

:::: {#rf-027 .note}
::: title
:::

27\.

Hokey Min, "Exploring Omni-channels for Customer-centric E-tailing,"

Logistics

5, no. 2 (2021), May 25, 2021, https://doi.org/10.3390/logistics5020031.
::::

# 

category management

grouping similar products into categories based on customer usage

central business district (CBD)

the commercial and business center of a given city or town

freestanding retail locations

store retailers that are not attached to any other retailer or
establishment

gross margin

net sales minus the cost of goods sold

keystone pricing

a pricing strategy that doubles the price from the wholesaler or
manufacturer

maintained markup

the actual markup on the merchandise that is sold to the consumer

markdown

a price decrease for a product that is at the end of its life cycle or
season

markup

the amount added to the cost retailers purchase goods for

merchandise

the goods that are being offered for sale by a retailer

omnichannel marketing

utilization of multiple distribution channels

original markup

the markup a business has decided upon at the onset of the offering,
which includes planned sales and overhead

regional shopping centers

commonly referred to as "malls"; collection of stores that offer general
merchandise or fashion-oriented offerings

strip malls

classified by an attached row of retail stores offering both products
and services
