m00120

f8ac9c94-ca40-4797-bebc-7352c945bfb1

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

List major trends and developments in retailing.

Discuss the reason for these trends and developments.

# Trends in Retailing {#sect-00002}

As consumer behavior changes and as technology advances, marketers must
make changes to stay relevant in the minds of their target market.
During the late 1800s, the department store began the transition away
from small mom-and-pop stores. In the 1920s, the first supermarket
opened. In the 1950s, door-to-door selling was in full swing. In the
1980s, infomercials became mainstream. In the 1990s, online shopping got
its start. In the 2000s, traditional brick-and-mortar stores began
online sales. The rise of social media began in 2007, which created new
selling opportunities (see [\#](#)). Then, in 2017, the United States
saw a slight shift back toward traditional store retailers. But, alas,
in 2020 as the COVID-19 pandemic arose, that shift reversed again to
online. These are just a few examples of how retailing has evolved with
the times in the last century. As consumers get busier with their work
and social lives, retailers find new ways to create value with the
products they are selling. Let's take a deeper look at some of the more
recent trends in retailing.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

## Social Commerce {#sect-00003}

Social commerce is the blend of e-commerce and social media. With the
rise of social media, brands have found new ways to engage and create
lasting relationships with consumers. Many brands use social media as an
additional marketing tool to engage more personally with customers.
Retailers can do so in a variety of ways, from shoppable posts to
influencer videos and everything in between.

Let's take a look at Macy's, an iconic American department store chain
founded in 1858. Macy's has weathered many changes in the retail
landscape, and today it utilizes social commerce in a variety of ways.
In 2020, the company opened its ambassador program to people outside the
company---influencers who would promote Macy's products through
affiliate links or shoppable videos on social media. The pay is 5
percent commission on sales. Why this shift to working with influencers?
Simple. Consumers tend to trust the opinion of influential individuals
over company-created marketing. And for Macy's and numerous other
retailers, the strategy has worked because social commerce grew 30
percent from 2019 to 2020.

As social media has grown since the inception of Facebook in 2004,
marketers and social media apps alike have taken advantage of the
ability of consumers to interact with brands and to purchase products
directly in-app. For example, Instagram's Shop and Checkout feature
allows consumers to purchase products immediately without ever leaving
the app. With the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the ability of
consumers to purchase products while staying sheltered in place resulted
in a change in behavior that is likely to endure in the coming years.

## Online Stores in Offline Spaces {#sect-00004}

Have you ever purchased something online and picked it up at the store?
This is what is referred to as online stores in offline spaces. While
this practice was slowly gaining traction among larger retailers, the
COVID-19 pandemic accelerated this trend drastically throughout nearly
every industry. Retailers that already had the technology in place
and/or were already testing such practices made a fairly easy transition
to this new demand. Others closed their doors forever or scrambled to
update their strategies to include some form of online sales.

Walgreens, the second-largest pharmacy chain in the United States, was
extremely successful in making such changes on the fly. In 2019, the
company began allowing customers to order items online and pick them up
at the drive-through window, which was previously primarily used for
prescription pick up. Because the drive-through window was already
established at Walgreens, it put them at a unique advantage to
transition quickly to offer online orders in offline spaces.

## Same-Day Delivery {#sect-00005}

While most might think of Amazon Prime as the originator of same-day
package delivery, the concept has actually been around for decades but
was less prevalent in retail. Companies that offer legal and financial
services have long had same-day delivery of their documents. In
addition, restaurants have been offering guaranteed on-time delivery for
some time. Florists have also offered one-day service for many years,
particularly for funeral arrangements. And while Amazon Prime made the
practice much more widespread throughout retailing, the now-defunct
company Kozmo.com likely pioneered the practice in 1998.

Kozmo was an online retailer that promised one-hour delivery of "videos,
games, DVDs, music, mags, books, food, basics & more," including
Starbucks coffee. The company was popular with young professionals and
college students, but it couldn't stay afloat and closed in 2001. The
company likely inspired the US Postal Service Metro Post, which allowed
Amazon to offer same-day delivery of packages in San Francisco in 2012.
Fast-forward to today, and many retailers, including Amazon and Walmart,
offer same-day delivery in larger, well-populated areas.

## The Emergence of Digital Wallets {#sect-00006}

Digital wallets are software-based systems that allow for secure
transactions. Digital wallets were first used in the late 1990s, but
today they offer more security and allow users to save numerous
passwords and payment methods. The system allows users to quickly make
online purchases without having to remember passwords or dig through
their physical wallets to get cash. They also allow users to pay for
products and services in-store directly from their phones, allowing for
touchless payments.

If you are familiar with the Apple Store or the Google Play Store,
you've likely used digital wallets. When you purchase online on one of
these devices, an automated display will come up asking if you would
like to save your log-in and payment information. Once saved, each time
you log in to the same website or begin to make a purchase, the digital
wallet will auto-fill your information. While digital wallets are a huge
time-saver for consumers, they also benefit retailers by capturing a
sale that might have been lost due to inconvenience.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00007}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00008}

:::: {#rf-028 .note}
::: title
:::

28\.

Liz Flora, "Macy's Doubles Down on Social Commerce," Glossy, Digiday
Media, August 4, 2020,
https://www.glossy.co/beauty/macys-doubles-down-on-social-commerce/.
::::

:::: {#rf-029 .note}
::: title
:::

29\.

Jessica Wong, "The Latest E-commerce Trend: What You Need to Know about
Social Commerce," Forbes Communications Council, Forbes Media, December
3, 2021,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbescommunicationscouncil/2021/12/03/the-latest-e-commerce-trend-what-you-need-to-know-about-social-commerce/.
::::

:::: {#rf-030 .note}
::: title
:::

30\.

"How Social Media Shopping Is Changing the Retail Game,"

Floor Covering News

, February 8, 2022,
https://www.fcnews.net/2022/02/how-social-media-shopping-is-changing-the-retail-game/.
::::

:::: {#rf-031 .note}
::: title
:::

31\.

UWorx Group, "Online Stores in Offline Spaces," LinkedIn, October 13,
2021,
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/online-stores-offline-spaces-uworx-group/.
::::

:::: {#rf-032 .note}
::: title
:::

32\.

"Walgreens Introduces New Digital 'Order Ahead' Drive-Thru Shopping
Experience," Walgreens Newsroom, Walgreens, May 4, 2020,
https://news.walgreens.com/press-center/news/walgreens-introduces-new-digital-order-ahead-drive-thru-shopping-experience.htm.
::::

:::: {#rf-033 .note}
::: title
:::

33\.

"The Rise of Same-Day Package Delivery,"

Our Blog

, Parcel Pending, last modified September 2, 2021,
https://www.parcelpending.com/blog/the-rise-of-same-day-package-delivery/.
::::

:::: {#rf-034 .note}
::: title
:::

34\.

Kozmo.com (website), Wayback Machine, Internet Archive, archived April
8, 2000,
https://web.archive.org/web/20000408214847/http://www.kozmo.com/.
::::

:::: {#rf-035 .note}
::: title
:::

35\.

"MetroPost,"

United States Postal Service 2014 Annual Report to Congress

, United States Postal Service, 2014,
https://about.usps.com/publications/annual-report-comprehensive-statement-2014/ar2014/annualreport2014_tech_071.htm.
::::

:::: {#rf-036 .note}
::: title
:::

36\.

Julia Kagan, "Digital Wallet Explained: Types with Examples and How It
Works," Investopedia, Dotdash Meredith, updated April 10, 2022,
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/d/digital-wallet.asp.
::::

# 

digital wallets

software-based systems that allow for secure transactions

social commerce

a blend of e-commerce and social media
