m00121

eac8050f-440a-4c1b-8a1a-132726160927

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define wholesaling.

Identify different types of wholesalers.

# Wholesaling Defined {#sect-00002}

Wholesaling is the business of buying goods in bulk at a discount from a
manufacturer or other distribution channel member and selling them to
retailers for a higher price. Wholesalers are often referred to as
middlemen because they are the entity that links the producer to the
retailer. Unlike retailers, wholesalers generally do not interact with
customers or have physical locations for them to visit. Wholesalers
engage in a variety of business practices including buying, storing,
selling, and marketing.

Wholesalers are integral marketing intermediaries, responsible for
getting the right product to the right place at the right time and
creating additional value for the customer and other channel members.
Furthermore, wholesalers actually make the final price for consumers
less because they purchase in bulk, whereas some smaller retailers could
not afford do so. There are several types of wholesalers, and each has
its unique importance in the distribution channel.

# Types of Wholesalers {#sect-00003}

In addition to the general importance noted above, each type of
wholesaler plays a specific and integral role in getting products from a
manufacturer to the end user. The decision of which type of wholesaler a
retailer will utilize---or which type of wholesaling a wholesaler
chooses---will largely depend on the type of product, the additional
services needed, and often, the industry as a whole. The following
section examines the types of merchant wholesalers (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

## Merchant Wholesalers {#sect-00004}

Merchant wholesalers engage in buying, storing, and physically handling
products in large quantities and selling those products in smaller
quantities to retailers. Merchant wholesalers are the most common form
of wholesaling and can take on many responsibilities in the distribution
channel to assist retailers. Merchant wholesalers are classified by the
level of service they provide to retailers and include full-service
wholesalers, limited-service wholesalers, and manufacturer's agents.
Retailers and manufacturers will choose which type of wholesaler to work
with based on their needs. Some large retailers, such as Walmart, may
need fewer services from wholesalers than smaller specialty stores will
need. As you continue to read, remember that wholesalers are a
business---so they are in business to make money, but they also take on
risk in doing so.

## Full-Service Wholesalers {#sect-00005}

Wholesalers that take on the most risk are full-service wholesalers.
Full-service wholesalers offer retailers the most complete range of
services, such as buying, selling, storage, transportation, sorting, and
financing. This type of wholesaler likely has its own salespeople to
assist retailers, and some assist in the stocking of the products on
retailers' shelves. They often provide retailers lines of credit to
purchase products now and pay at a later date. Merchant wholesalers
focus on either general or specialty merchandise.

Full-service wholesalers that offer an extensive list of merchandise for
sale are known as general-merchandise (full-line) wholesalers. Retailers
are able to purchase most, if not all, of their inventory from one
wholesaler. For retailers, general-merchandise wholesaling is convenient
because it provides for greater availability and flexibility with
product quantities. However, retailers need to be cautious in utilizing
only one wholesaler for all of their needs as they may find themselves
in predicaments they cannot contractually be protected from---such as
higher prices.

Unlike general-merchandise wholesalers, which focus on an extensive line
of products, specialty wholesalers focus on a limited line of products.
For example, Sysco, one of the country's largest food-service
wholesalers, focuses on limited product lines, such as food and
food-service supplies. The company's target market includes hospitals
and nursing homes, schools and colleges, and other entities that offer
food service on a large scale. You might be surprised to learn that your
high school cafeteria or college commons is served by Sysco. The company
offers a host of services to its customers, such as financing,
consultation, menu assistance, and food production.

## Limited-Service Wholesalers {#sect-00006}

As the name suggests, limited-service wholesalers offer a limited range
of services to retailers. These wholesalers often compensate for the
lack of services by offering lower prices than full-service wholesalers.
For example, a limited-service wholesaler may not be able to offer
retailers financing or stocking services, but it may purchase excess
inventory from full-service wholesalers or manufacturers at a deeply
discounted rate and in turn offer a better price to retailers.
Limited-service wholesalers offer retailers many services to increase
value.

Rack jobbers are companies that work with retailers to display and sell
a product in-store. These items are often not products that the retailer
would ordinarily stock and are budget-friendly items. For example, when
you enter a gas station and see a rack of cell phone chargers and
accessories, it is likely that they are from a rack jobber. The rack
jobber stocks and maintains the cell phone display, and the gas station
receives a portion of the sales. The advantage to the retailer is that
it is not responsible for ordering products or maintaining and stocking
displays; it is almost like passive income. The biggest disadvantage to
retailers is that rack jobbers may over- or under-order products or fail
to maintain displays as frequently as needed.

Cash-and-carry wholesalers are those that offer a limited line of
fast-moving goods that they sell to retailers for cash. Because these
wholesalers do not have to have massive amounts of storage space and do
not offer services, they are able to offer products at lower prices.
They also do not often deliver products, so they do not have overhead
related to transportation. The advantage to the retailer is lower
prices. But the disadvantages include no guarantee of product, the
expense of transportation, and the demand for cash payment.

Drop shippers are retailers that use suppliers to ship products directly
to the end consumer. In this case, retailers sell the product to the
consumer, but they don't actually ever take possession (stock on a
shelf, have inventory, etc.) of the product. The retailer only pays for
the product after the consumer pays for and receives the order. Drop
shipping is advantageous to retailers because they do not assume much
risk since they do not take possession of the product. However, the
profit margins for drop shippers are usually lower than utilizing other
wholesalers because the wholesaler assumes all the risk.

Truck jobbers are wholesalers that make calls to retailers carrying
goods on a truck. They carry a small inventory of the same product or
small product lines, such as milk or bread. Because they have inventory
in the truck, they can stop at a retailer, take the order, and deliver
it within the same call. Truck jobbers are most often used for
perishable foods that cannot sit in a warehouse waiting to be ordered.

## Manufacturer's Agents or Representatives {#sect-00007}

The final, and perhaps least common, type of wholesaler is a
manufacturer's agent or manufacturer's representative. Unlike the other
types of wholesalers mentioned above, agents do not take possession of
any product at any time. Rather, manufacturer's agents are independent
contractors who act as salespersons for multiple manufacturers to sell
similar (but not competing) products to retailers. The agent provides
advantages to both to the manufacturer and the retailer. This is
particularly true for smaller manufacturers where the expense and
management of a sales force would likely not be feasible. Rather, an
agent can take on the responsibility of working with the retailers or
wholesalers to sell the product.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00008}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00009}

:::: {#rf-037 .note}
::: title
:::

37\.

"Wholesaling," Encyclopedia Table of Contents,

Inc.

, updated January 5, 2021,
https://www.inc.com/encyclopedia/wholesaling.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-038 .note}
::: title
:::

38\.

"Our Products," Sysco, accessed September 2, 2022,
https://www.sysco.com/Products/Products/Product-Categories.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-039 .note}
::: title
:::

39\.

"Sysco's Customers Performance," CSI Market, accessed September 2, 2022,
https://csimarket.com/stocks/markets_glance.php?code=SYY.
::::

:::: {#rf-040 .note}
::: title
:::

40\.

"Manufacturers' Agents," Encyclopedia Table of Contents,

Inc.

, updated January 5, 2021,
https://www.inc.com/encyclopedia/manufacturers-agents.html.
::::

# 

cash-and-carry wholesalers

wholesalers that offer a limited line of fast-moving goods that they
sell to retailers for cash

drop shippers

a wholesaler business model where retailers use suppliers to ship
products directly to the end consumer

full-service wholesalers

wholesalers that offer retailers the most complete range of services,
such as buying, selling, storage, transportation, sorting, and financing

general-merchandise (full-line) wholesalers

wholesalers that offer an extensive list of merchandise for sale

limited-service wholesalers

wholesalers that offer a limited range of services to retailers to
increase value

manufacturer's agents

independent contractors who act as salespeople for multiple
manufacturers to sell similar (but not competing) products to retailers

merchant wholesalers

wholesalers that engage in buying, storing, and physically handling
products in large quantities and selling those products in smaller
quantities to retailers

rack jobbers

wholesalers (or manufacturers) that agree with retailers to display and
sell a product in a retail store

specialty wholesalers

wholesalers that focus on a limited line of products but carry the line
in some depth

truck jobbers

wholesalers that make calls to retailers carrying goods on a truck

wholesaling

the business of buying goods in bulk at a discount from a manufacturer
or other distribution channel member and selling them retailers for a
higher price
