m00122

108d5151-1570-4c07-9903-645aee3c0ca6

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Explain the impact of growing competition and global dynamics.

Discuss the complexity of regulatory requirements.

Discuss the challenges of technology evolution.

# Growing Competition {#sect-00002}

Prior to 2019, most of us did not give much thought to the supply chain
or its channel members. We went to the store and were welcomed with
endless aisles of the products we were used to purchasing. However, when
the COVID-19 pandemic hit, the entire country became more in tune with
channel members. Wholesalers were not unaffected by the disruption that
the pandemic caused channel members, and new trends are on the horizon
for wholesalers. Let's take a look at these recent trends that affect
wholesaling.

Wholesalers are a central link in the economy and supply chain. The
industry is facing tough competition with new as well as nontraditional
wholesalers entering the market. Just as consumers are demanding more
convenient shopping experiences and increased value in products and
services, retailers are demanding the same from their intermediaries.
Wholesalers must find innovative and competitive business models to
compete.

# The Impact of Global Dynamics on the Supply Chain {#sect-00003}

Globalization has been integrating global markets for the past several
decades. And supply chains have had to adjust to keep up with these
changes. With products available from around the world at lower costs
and retailers demanding faster deliveries, many wholesalers have
expanded their operations in response to the rise of the global economy.
This comes with its own set of challenges, such as an expanded sales
force and the need to understand other economies, cultures, and
languages.

More recently, it has become apparent in the United States and around
the world that supply chain participants were not prepared for
disruptions such as those seen during the COVID-19 pandemic. Shortages
of workers, products, containers, and long-haul truck drivers have
proven to the industry that some major changes need to occur.

# Regulatory Requirements and Complexity {#sect-00004}

With advancements in technology (and the need for consumer security) as
well as the growing global economy, regulatory requirements also
increase---and become more complex. Wholesalers must understand such
requirements in order to conduct business legally. For example,
wholesalers need a special license to distribute restricted goods, such
as alcohol, controlled drugs, firearms, and pesticides. Depending on the
type of transportation mode being used---such as tractor-trailers
hauling containers---special licensing may need to be obtained.

Wholesalers also have a large responsibility when it comes to disposing
of waste. More specific government regulations in regard to wholesalers
include the Sale of Goods Act, which requires goods sold to be safe and
include clear directions. The government has also enacted various rules
to protect consumers and to be able to trace products.

## Consumer Protection {#sect-00005}

*Caveat emptor* (Latin for "let the buyer beware") was a long-standing
motto in commercial transactions, one that implies the buyer purchases
at their own risk. However, consumer protection laws are now woven into
the fabric of the economy. Regulations help keep sellers honest and
consumers protected. In general, consumer protection regulations exist
to prevent unethical or dangerous business practices throughout the
distribution channel. These practices range from false advertising to
predatory lending to scams and frauds. Some of these will be discussed
later in the chapter.

## Product Traceability {#sect-00006}

Product traceability refers to the ability to track all processes for a
product, from the procurement of raw materials to production,
consumption, and disposal. Increasing numbers of consumers want to know
exactly where their products are coming from and whether they are
ethically sourced. Aside from consumer demand, it is a crucial part of
the distribution channel as product recalls become more common.

For example, on January 6, 2022, the US Department of Agriculture (USDA)
announced a recall of over 25,000 pounds of ground beef. Because of
product traceability, the specific ground beef under the recall was able
to be traced to a specific location, production date, and lot. Without
product traceability, there may have been no way of knowing where the
ground beef came from, forcing consumers to discard purchases of product
that was not tainted. Additionally, product traceability helps combat
counterfeit products by finding the originating source.

:::: {#note-00005 .note}
::: title
Traceability Standards
:::

The GS1 Global Traceability Standard defines what is minimally
acceptable for full supply chain traceability. It establishes a full
system that traces products end to end. Read [more about the standards
and see how it's applied](#) to food.
::::

# Challenges of Technology Evolution {#sect-00007}

The advancement and increased use of technology has brought about both
challenges and opportunities for wholesalers. Product traceability has
become increasingly easier, for example. Orders are easier to make and
track. However, technology is expensive and comes with a learning curve
for new users. The increased demand of consumers and retail customers
requires wholesalers to keep up with technological advancements to stay
competitive.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00008}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00009}

:::: {#rf-041 .note}
::: title
:::

41\.

Claire Shaw, "Legal Requirements for Wholesalers and Retailers,"

Everyday Law Blog UK

, Rocket Lawyer, June 9, 2021,
https://www.rocketlawyer.com/gb/en/blog/legal-requirements-for-wholesalers-and-retailers/.
::::

:::: {#rf-042 .note}
::: title
:::

42\.

Ana Gonzalez Ribeiro, "What Are Consumer Protection Laws?,"
Investopedia, Dotdash Meredith, updated August 1, 2022,
https://www.investopedia.com/articles/pf/10/know-your-consumer-protection-laws.asp.
::::

:::: {#rf-043 .note}
::: title
:::

43\.

Ash Baggott, "What Is Product Traceability?,"

Holded Blog

, Holded, November 14, 2019,
https://www.holded.com/blog/what-is-product-traceability.
::::

:::: {#rf-044 .note}
::: title
:::

44\.

"Interstate Meat Dist. Inc. Recalls Ground Beef Products due to Possible
E. Coli 0157:H7 Contamination," Food Safety and Inspection Service, U.S.
Department of Agriculture, January 6, 2022,
https://www.fsis.usda.gov/recalls-alerts/interstate-meat-dist.-inc.-recalls-ground-beef-products-due-possible-e.-coli-o157h7.
::::

# 

product traceability

the ability to track all processes for a product from the procurement of
raw materials to production, consumption, and disposal
