m00123

5ebac2f1-08b9-4ec6-a5d2-aa1832505bbe

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Discuss ethical issues in retailing.

Discuss ethical issues in wholesaling.

# Ethical Issues in Retailing {#sect-00002}

As with any business entity, ethical issues arise in both retailing and
wholesaling. It can be easy to find oneself in an ethical dilemma while
trying to meet consumer demands and stay competitive. There are several
prominent ethical issues that arise specifically with retailing and
wholesaling.

Because retailers are the final link between manufacturer and consumer,
ethical issues often arise in the practices used toward consumers.
Common issues in retail include deceptive or misleading marketing, poor
treatment of consumers, and misleading sales tactics.

## Unethical Practices Used by Retailers {#sect-00003}

Although there has been a considerable rise in the number of consumers
and advocacy groups calling out unethical business practices, many
retailers still attempt to use tactics to sway consumers into purchasing
products. Truly Organic, a retailer based in Miami Beach, Florida, came
under attack by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) in 2019 for
misleading consumers into believing their products were 100 percent
organic, which wasn't entirely true. The case stated that Truly Organic
was guilty of false or misleading advertising, an unethical marketing
practice by which consumers are given false or misleading information
about a product or service.

Misleading or manipulative sales tactics is another common unethical
practice used by retailers. Misleading sales tactics involve misleading
the consumer with untrue information regarding a product or service.
Subscription services used to be notorious for misleading sales tactics
as they offered a service or product for a free trial but did not
include in the promotion that the consumer would be charged every month
after a free trial. There are many regulations that require such
companies to disclose this information.

# Ethical Issues in Wholesaling {#sect-00004}

Just as retailers may face the temptation to be unethical toward
consumers, wholesalers often find themselves in an ethical dilemma with
their retail customers. Two common ethical issues that arise in
wholesaling surround fairness and pricing.

## Fairness and Billing {#sect-00005}

*Fairness* can certainly be a subjective term. What you and your sibling
may each deem as fair is based on your individual perspectives and
opinions. In wholesaling, and commerce in general, the government has
enacted regulations to maintain fairness in business practices. You have
probably heard the term "monopoly." In the United States, monopolies are
considered unfair business practices and thus are largely against FTC
regulations. If one or a few businesses control all of an industry, the
laws of supply and demand cease to exist because one company controls
both. In the wholesaling industry, the same rules apply. If a wholesaler
requires a retailer to sign very specific contracts that they will use
no other wholesaler, the retailer is at the mercy of the wholesaler when
it comes to everything surrounding their business's livelihood.

Just as with fairness, wholesalers also need to pay close attention to
their billing practices. Wholesalers and retailers agree on the billing
method to be used in their contract. However, it is unethical for
wholesalers to bill retailers for product never shipped or received,
damaged product without recourse, or product not ordered.

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
Trader Joe's
:::

In 1967 in Pasadena, California, the first Trader Joe's was opened.
Today, the retail grocery chain has 505 stores in over 42 states as well
as an online presence. Trader Joe's has always been committed to
improving sustainability in its channel. Unlike many competitors in the
grocery industry, Trader Joe's donates 100 percent of its unsold
products. It does not allow certain controversial products in the
manufacturing of its private-label goods and continues to make organic
products more accessible. Additionally, the company has removed more
than 6 million pounds of plastic from packaging and continues to have
high rates of employee satisfaction. The ethical decisions of Trader
Joe's involve relationship building throughout the supply chain to
ensure that each channel member upholds the high ethical standards that
help enhance the customer experience.

There are other supermarkets known for ethical practices. These include
Natural Grocers, Sprouts, Costco, and Whole Foods.
::::

#  {#sect-00006}

This chapter explores two important members of the distribution channel
and value delivery system: wholesalers and retailers. Both add value to
the product by ensuring assorted merchandise is available when and where
customers want it and at an acceptable price. Retailers buy products
from manufacturing firms or wholesalers and provide them for sale to the
consumer.

Retailers buy in bulk, hold inventory, offer convenient hours for
shoppers, supply services, and collect and share feedback from consumers
with other members of the distribution channel. Retailers may have a
storefront; non-store retailers usually sell through direct mail and
catalogs, vending machines, direct selling, online sites, TV home
shopping, and telemarketing. Retail strategy includes identifying target
audiences, choosing location(s), providing a product assortment, and
pricing.

Wholesalers buy goods in bulk at a discount from a manufacturer or other
distribution channel member and sell them to retailers for a higher
price. They are often called "middlemen" because they link the
manufacturer to the retailer. Unlike retailers, wholesalers do not
interact with the final consumer, and they do not have highly visible
physical locations accessible to end consumers. Wholesalers engage in a
variety of business practices including buying, storing, selling,
transporting, financing, and even marketing.

Just as in all marketing strategies, retailers and wholesalers contend
with changes in consumer behavior and expectations, technological
advances, complex regulations, channel member availability, and
international dynamics. Of the regulations, most are intended to protect
consumers from unethical or dangerous products and business practices.

#  {#sect-00007}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00008}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00009}

Have you ever worked in a grocery store stocking shelves, worked at your
campus bookstore, or waited on customers at a restaurant or
drive-through? Working in retail is a fantastic resume booster. Not only
have you advanced your knowledge of the business world, but you have
also worked closely with demanding customers and management in a retail
environment. Learning to serve customers, following training and rules,
being part of a successful job interview, and holding a job outside of
school are all highly coveted experiences. According to the Skills You
Need website, the most important employability skills include "getting
along with and working well with other people" and "being reliable and
dependable: doing what you say you will by the deadline you have agreed
\[to\] and turning up when you are meant to be there." Create or revise
your resume to include the applicable skills.

#  {#sect-00010}

C.H. Robinson is a third-party logistics provider headquartered in Eden
Prairie, Minnesota. Many businesses outsource elements of distribution,
warehousing, and fulfillment services to companies such as C.H.
Robinson. Like wholesalers, logistics providers, also an intrinsic part
of the value delivery system, operate largely outside of the public eye.

Reach out to one of the 297 C.H. Robinson locations and ask if you can
speak to someone about recent supply chain trends for a college course
assignment. Your questions may include the following:

How does technology impact the supply chain?

What is the biggest industry you work with that depends on supply chain
partners?

How has the COVID-19 pandemic impacted product availability and
distribution efforts?

What does a typical day at C.H. Robinson consist of?

What special training do I need to work in supply chain logistics?

What is a typical salary for a professional new to C.H. Robinson?

Do you have an internship program?

#  {#sect-00011}

Complete the following information about the company and
products/services you chose to focus on as you develop the marketing
plan throughout the course. You may need to conduct research in order to
obtain the necessary information.

Instructions: Using the Marketing Plan Template file you created from
the [Marketing and Customer Value](#) assignment and expanded upon in
[Strategic Planning in Marketing](#), [Market Segmentation, Targeting,
and Positioning](#), [Marketing Research and Market Intelligence](#),
[Products: Consumer Offerings](#), [Pricing Products and Services](#),
[Integrated Marketing Communications](#), and [Distribution: Delivering
Customer Value](#), complete the following section of your marketing
plan:

Budgeting

Action Programs

Controls to Monitor Progress

Submit the marketing plan to your instructor for grading and feedback.

#  {#sect-00012}

## Ace Hardware {#sect-00013}

With annual sales of more than \$400 billion in the United States, the
home improvement market has no shortage of eager shoppers. While Home
Depot and Lowe's dominate the market in terms of sales, Ace Hardware
dominates by number of locations and customer satisfaction.

What started in 1924 as a way for the independent hardware retailer to
buy inventory like the "big guys," saving money based on volume, has
grown into one of the largest and most well-known retailer-owned
cooperatives. Founded by a group of Chicago hardware store owners who
wanted to save money and enable the smaller hardware store to compete,
is now a worldwide leader in home improvement.

Ace prides itself on being the local neighborhood hardware store. Its
major niche in the market is to provide the best service to customers.
To this end, Ace has always hired knowledgeable staff to help answer
questions, locate products, and provide advice. Ace buys inventory
according to the needs and wants of its local consumers, but its real
niche is in customer service. Generally, a customer isn't in the store
for more than five minutes before a friendly, red-shirted Ace employee
is asking if they need help.

Early on, Ace wanted to set itself apart based on its helpful and
friendly service. Playing on this value proposition and looking to build
brand awareness, Ace crafted a very catchy ad campaign, which has
solidified the Ace brand. Back in the 1970s and 1980s, Ace became known
by its famous jingle, "Ace is the place with the helpful hardware man."
This jingle is still being used today, and you can see it here.

[Ace \'Hardware Man\' Commercial (1978)](#)

Because retailers must execute well on all the marketing mix variables,
for a retailer like Ace to be successful, it needs to understand its
customers in the local market. In doing so, it can also identify the
best location for the store in order to meet the needs of those
customers and how they travel around town. Ace knows the customers well,
so it is able to set prices and provide products according to local
needs.

One of the founding principles of Ace is that each store should be
locally owned and operated. Because of this, Ace is embedded in the
communities they serve. You will often find the local Ace team stepping
in to help with community projects or sponsor local sports teams. The
stores work with independent producers to stock locally made products.

Over the past decade, retailing has seen significant changes in how
consumers shop. Amazon has swiftly transformed and dominated retailing.
Many independent brick-and-mortar retailers have been unable to compete
with the convenience of online ordering and at-home delivery.

And with the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, retailers
everywhere were scrambling to adapt. Ace quickly transformed into an
online as well as in-store retailer. Through a quick revamp of its
website, Ace was able to offer its customers the ability to order and
pay online with options to either pick up at the store or have the
product(s) delivered to their home. Home delivery was fulfilled by the
local Ace Hardware employees.

Another advantage to Ace Hardware is the services it provides. Making
keys, sharpening lawn mower blades and chains for chain saws, repairing
screens, and mixing customer paint have allowed Ace to go the extra mile
for items customers must come to the store for.

## Case Questions {#sect-00014}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00015}

:::: {#rf-045 .note}
::: title
:::

45\.

"Truly Organic Inc.," Legal Library, Federal Trade Commission, updated
September 19, 2019,
https://www.ftc.gov/enforcement/cases-proceedings/192-3077/truly-organic-inc.
::::

:::: {#rf-046 .note}
::: title
:::

46\.

Heather Seely, "8 Most Ethical Supermarkets for Guilt-Free Grocery
Shopping," Tamborasi, February 8, 2021,
https://www.tamborasi.com/ethical-supermarkets/.
::::

:::: {#rf-047 .note}
::: title
:::

47\.

Seely, "8 Most Ethical Supermarkets."
::::

:::: {#rf-048 .note}
::: title
:::

48\.

"Employability Skills: The Skills You Need to Get a Job," Skills You
Need, accessed September 2, 2022,
https://www.skillsyouneed.com/Tedgeneral/employability-skills.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-049 .note}
::: title
:::

49\.

"DIY and Home Improvement in the U.S.: Statistics & Facts," Statista,
September 12, 2022,
https://www.statista.com/topics/1732/home-improvement/.
::::

:::: {#rf-050 .note}
::: title
:::

50\.

"Local Ace Hardware Store Services," Ace Hardware, accessed September 2,
2022, https://www.acehardware.com/store-services.
::::

# 

false or misleading advertising

an unethical marketing practice by which consumers are given false or
misleading information about a product or service
