m00136

7ebab0e9-03ce-4988-b1a5-8a9a8771c4eb

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

According to Accenture, a global professional services company,
"Sustainable organizations are purpose-led businesses which inspire
their people and partners to deliver lasting financial performance,
equitable impact, and societal value that earns and retains the trust of
all stakeholders." Sustainability is about doing business without
negatively affecting society. Without sustainable practices, companies
may negatively contribute to issues in the environment, inequality, and
social injustice. Consumers, employees, and other interested parties are
now holding businesses to higher standards: 74 percent of consumers
agree that conducting ethical practices is an important reason to
support a company or brand; 65 percent of employees believe that
businesses should leave their employees better off through work; and 81
percent of sustainable investment indexes outperformed comparable
benchmarks in 2020. According to John Streur, CEO of Calvert Research
and Management, "In 2021, we see companies almost competing with one
another on sustainability." The proof is in the pudding. A 2021 report
by the Weinreb Group found that "there were more chief sustainability
officers, or CSOs, recruited in 2020 than in the previous three years
combined."

*Barron's*, a respected source on financial news, creates a 100 Most
Sustainable Companies list each year. In 2021, the popular kitchen
supply store Williams-Sonoma stood out above others because its board
consisted of 67 percent women. Williams-Sonoma, Inc.'s 2021 impact
report outlined that, at the time of publication, 46 percent of the
company's products supported one or more of its environmental and social
initiatives, and the company aims to increase that amount to 75 percent
by 2030. In 2020, Williams-Sonoma joined the United Nations (UN) Global
Compact and aligned its corporate goals with the UN Sustainable
Development Goals. To learn more about Williams-Sonoma's sustainablity
efforts and plans, review its [2021 impact report](#), its [corporate
responsibility web page](#), and the [sustainability section of its
website](#).

Williams-Sonoma is just one example of a company with a vision and a
commitment to sustainability. Other companies known for their
sustainability commitments and practices include Microsoft, VMware,
Intuit, Apple, and Mastercard.

In the future, all global companies must commit to, assess, and validate
the goal of sustainability; as you\'ll learn in this chapter, it\'s
becoming a significant factor in how businesses evaluate success. Those
companies that fully embrace this commitment will stand out most to
consumers and achieve business success.

# Endnotes {#sect-00001}

:::: {#rf-001 .note}
::: title
:::

1\.

"Shaping the Sustainable Organization," Accenture, accessed September 7,
2022,
https://www.accenture.com/us-en/insights/sustainability/sustainable-organization.
::::

:::: {#rf-002 .note}
::: title
:::

2\.

Alexandra Spiliakos, "What Does 'Sustainability' Mean in Business?,"

Business Insights

(blog), Harvard Business School Online, October 10, 2018,
https://online.hbs.edu/blog/post/what-is-sustainability-in-business.
::::

:::: {#rf-003 .note}
::: title
:::

3\.

Accenture, "Shaping."
::::

:::: {#rf-004 .note}
::: title
:::

4\.

Lauren Foster, "Barron's 100 Most Sustainable Companies,"

Barron's

, February 11, 2022,
https://www.barrons.com/articles/most-sustainable-companies-51644564600.
::::

:::: {#rf-005 .note}
::: title
:::

5\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-006 .note}
::: title
:::

6\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-007 .note}
::: title
:::

7\.

Williams-Sonoma Inc.,

Good by Design: Impact Report 2021

, July 2022,
https://sustainability.williams-sonomainc.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/07/WSI-2021-Impact-Report.pdf.
::::

:::: {#rf-008 .note}
::: title
:::

8\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-009 .note}
::: title
:::

9\.

Diana Olick, "These Are the 10 Greenest Large Companies of 2022,
according to Just Capital," CNBC, April 22, 2022,
https://www.cnbc.com/2022/04/22/10-greenest-large-companies-of-2022-according-to-just-capital.html.
::::
