m00124

a6a51a59-b6b8-467b-9d96-c387b8a9b3aa

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define sustainable marketing.

Explain the three pillars of sustainable marketing.

# Environmental Sustainability {#sect-00002}

Consumers increasingly demand purpose over profits from the brands they
work for, shop for, invest in, and allow within their communities. In
fact, an IBM study on consumer behavior indicated that 57 percent of
consumers would alter consumption habits to be more environmentally
conscious, and nearly 80 percent of survey respondents indicated that
sustainability is essential. Therefore, sustainability is a business
imperative. As defined by Philip Kotler, Professor Emeritus at
Northwestern University, "the concept of sustainable marketing holds
that an organization should meet the needs of its present consumers
without compromising the ability of future generations to fulfill their
own needs." In other words, products and services consumed today should
not harm consumers of tomorrow.

Sustainable marketing infuses purpose into socially conscious brands,
products, and services. Marketing seeks to differentiate the brand based
on mission. Sustainable brands define a purpose, orient to consumers\'
and related groups\' values, align purpose with strategy, and reflect
sustainability in marketing. This business strategy gives brands an edge
with those who seek brands that align with their values.

The three pillars of sustainable marketing include environmental
sustainability, social good, and economic return (see [\#](#)). You may
have heard the term "planet, people, and profits," which describes the
three pillars of sustainable marketing. Businesses meet the needs of the
marketplace without sacrificing the future viability of the world.
Companies are increasingly following an environmental, social, and
governance strategy and use these ESG pillars to guide their work. The
topic extends beyond sustainability into doing what's right socially and
ethically. Companies report their quantitative and qualitative results
in annual disclosures to share the impact of ESG efforts.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
ESG
:::

Are you interested in learning more about the elements of ESG? Here are
several sources where you can read more:

Global advisory firm, PwC

Finance company, NerdWallet

HubSpot 2022 sustainability report

Accenture
::::

The environmental pillar focuses on reducing a company's impact on the
environment. For example, companies may reduce their environmental
impact through recycling, reusing, minimizing waste, and increasing
energy efficiency. Stonyfield Organic has a commitment to the
environmental pillar with its plans to cut carbon emissions by 30
percent by 2030. In addition, it plans to focus on energy conservation,
waste reduction, and sustainable packaging and logistics. Additionally,
Subaru of Indiana Automotive operates a "green lean" manufacturing
facility that is designed as zero landfill. Subaru recycles or composts
98 percent of its manufacturing waste, and the remaining 2 percent is
incinerated as waste to fuel.

The social pillar considers a company's consumers and employees and
creates a more inclusive environment for its community. Much of the work
in the social pillar occurs through responsive programs for employees
that increase well-being. However, companies can also reach beyond their
walls to impact their communities.

:::: {#note-00006 .note}
::: title
The Story behind State Bags
:::

There are many examples of companies that work to support their
communities. One example is State Bags. State Bags donates a bag filled
with school supplies for each bag purchased. It also partners with
nonprofits such as Seeds of Peace, Time's Up, and Bottomless Closet to
support women and children from underserved communities. You can learn
more about [State Bags and its work by visiting the company's
website](#) or following [the State Bags Instagram account](#).
::::

Adobe is another example of a company that works inside and outside its
organization to effect social change by partnering with local nonprofits
in the communities in which its employees live and work. Adobe has a
rich diversity, equity, and inclusion initiative within its organization
that empowers diverse voices. For example, Gen Create is a digital space
for diverse thinkers and creators to collaborate to change the world for
the common good. Finally, Adobe provides access to its software to
underserved communities to work toward greater equity regardless of
location.

:::: {#note-00008 .note}
::: title
Adobe Gen Create
:::

Check out [Adobe's Gen Create program](#), a place for young creators to
collaborate and effect change.
::::

The economic pillar (governance pillar) of sustainability concerns
profitability and business ethics. Businesses cannot be sustainable if
they are not profitable, which is a clear key sustainability performance
indicator. Companies can demonstrate success in the economic pillar
through proper governance structures, risk management, and compliance.
Proper governance over voting, legal compliance, and accounting
standards shows people that companies are following their obligations.
Governance also includes business ethics, anticompetitive practices, and
tax transparency. At the end of the day, is the company doing the right
thing for its investors and all of its interested parties?

Governance structures can be examined to ensure diversity of leadership
that aligns with the company's various interested and influential
groups. Fortune and Refinitiv partnered to develop a Measure Up
initiative that aims to bring transparency to businesses diversity,
equity, and inclusion work of the Fortune 500. The initiative reviewed
measures such as policies, employee resource groups, percentage of
minorities in board or leadership positions, and salary parity to
determine a score for companies. Companies such as Microsoft, Target,
and Gap rated highly on the criteria, demonstrating advanced diversity,
equity, and inclusion. Amazon publishes its representation statistics
sorted by job level to illustrate how it is making progress on creating
a more diverse workforce.

:::: {#note-00010 .note}
::: title
Measure Up
:::

[Learn more about the Measure Up initiative](#) to help businesses build
fair and inclusive work spaces. In its work, it ranks companies based on
their diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) disclosure and performance
metrics.
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00003}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00004}

:::: {#rf-010 .note}
::: title
:::

10\.

Karl Haller, Jim Lee, and Jane Cheung, "Meet the 2020 Consumers Driving
Change," Research Insights, June 2020,
https://www.ibm.com/downloads/cas/EXK4XKX8#:\~:text=Nearly%206%20in%2010%20consumers,this%20jumps%20to%2077%20percent.
::::

:::: {#rf-011 .note}
::: title
:::

11\.

Adanma Onuoha, "What Is Sustainable Marketing?" Network for Business
Sustainability, October 12, 2021,
https://nbs.net/articles/what-is-sustainable-marketing/.
::::

:::: {#rf-012 .note}
::: title
:::

12\.

Black Morgan, "101 Companies Committed to Reducing Their Carbon
Footprint,"

Forbes

, August 26, 2019,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/blakemorgan/2019/08/26/101-companies-committed-to-reducing-their-carbon-footprint/?sh=6c30ded6260b.
::::

:::: {#rf-013 .note}
::: title
:::

13\.

Roben Farzad, "Subaru of Indiana: America's Greenest Carmaker,"

Business Week

, June 7, 2011, https://www.nbcnews.com/id/wbna43269332.
::::

:::: {#rf-014 .note}
::: title
:::

14\.

Home page, State Bags, accessed March 10, 2022,
https://statebags.com/?source=pepperjam&publisherId=21181&clickId=3897953715.
::::

:::: {#rf-015 .note}
::: title
:::

15\.

"Measure Up Initiative: Fortune and Refinitiv Partnership
(Methodology)," Fortune, accessed March 20, 2022,
https://fortune.com/franchise-list-page/measure-up-initiative-fortune-refinitiv-partnership-methodology/.
::::

# 

economic pillar (governance pillar)

the sustainability pillar that concerns profitability and business
ethics

environmental pillar

the sustainability pillar that focuses on reducing a company's impact on
the environment

ESG pillars

the three pillars of environmental, social, and governance that guide
corporate sustainability work

social pillar

the sustainability pillar that focuses on creating an inclusive
environment for the community

sustainable marketing

a marketing strategy that infuses purpose into socially conscious
products and services
