m00132

524c4e25-fcd7-4ccd-8fb5-2ad171b765af

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Explain how the parties in traditional and sustainable marketing are
different.

Define the different objectives in traditional and sustainable
marketing.

# Differences between Traditional and Sustainable Marketing {#sect-00002}

Traditional marketing takes a customer approach and focuses on product,
price, place, and promotion for a target audience. Sustainable marketing
takes a "stakeholder approach" and considers customers, shareholders,
employees, vendors, interest groups, media, and the general public.
These groups are interested in the brand's sustainability agenda, which
becomes the focus of the marketing effort.

Costco is an example of a company that takes this kind of approach to
its sustainability marketing. Costco describes its sustainability agenda
this way: "Sustainability to us is remaining a profitable business while
doing the right thing." Costco honors three sustainability principles:
"For Costco to thrive, the world needs to thrive. We are committed to
doing our part to help. We focus on issues related to our business and
where we can contribute to real, results-driven positive impact. We do
not have all of the answers, are learning as we go and seek continuous
improvement." These principles demonstrate a commitment to all of
Costco's interested parties. For example, Costco pays its employees
above market rates to honor its commitment to support its employees and
communities.

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
Costco Sustainability Commitment
:::

Costco publishes its commitment to sustainability on its website as a
way to be fully transparent about its sustainability strategy. The
company shares its code of ethics, mission statement, sustainability
principles and responsibilities, and development goals. You can [read
more about its commitment here](#).
::::

Traditional business strategy indicates that shareholder return is the
primary obligation of companies. However, a sustainable business
strategy suggests that companies have a corporate social responsibility
(CSR) to use their platforms to improve the world and not cause harm.
Furthermore, an environmental, social, and governance (ESG) strategy
holds companies accountable for their sustainability work. An ESG
strategy uses an organization's influence to make positive change and
develop metrics to show how purpose is measured.

Businesses have always been required to comply with environmental laws,
but sustainable companies put the environment in the center, designing
for the environment. New Belgium Brewery in Fort Collins, Colorado, is a
foremost example of a company designed around the environment. The brand
is committed to clean energy to combat climate change. New Belgium
Brewery has three principles woven into its business model to keep
management accountable for its sustainability goal of becoming carbon
neutral by 2030. Those principles are to

reduce emissions by creating electricity from wastewater, collecting
heat while brewing to reuse, and earning LEED certification on its
properties;

work with interest groups to advocate for improved climate policies; and

improve recycling in the United States through its cofounded glass
recycling coalition.

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
New Belgium Brewery Commitment to Climate
:::

Learn more about New Belgium Brewery sustainability strategies by
reading about its [commitment to climate](#).
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00003}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00004}

:::: {#rf-016 .note}
::: title
:::

16\.

"Costco Wholesale Corporation Sustainability Commitment," Costco,
accessed December 28, 2021,
https://www.costco.com/sustainability-introduction.html?&reloaded=true.
::::

:::: {#rf-017 .note}
::: title
:::

17\.

"Climate: Our Commitments," New Belgium Brewing, accessed December 6,
2021, https://www.newbelgium.com/company/mission/climate/.
::::

# 

corporate social responsibility (CSR)

sustainable business strategy where companies use their platform to do
good, improve the world, and be socially accountable to their customers
and other interested parties

environmental, social, and governance strategy

a strategy that holds companies accountable for a sustainability
strategy
