m00133

199d4d2d-daf5-40f4-a7d1-c245909364ab

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Describe the various benefits of sustainable marketing.

Explain why sustainable marketing is a business imperative.

# Purpose-Driven Strategy {#sect-00002}

A purpose-driven strategy is when companies work to make a difference in
their community through their decisions and support of environmental
programs. There are numerous benefits to developing a purpose-driven
business strategy, including enhanced brand recognition, reduced costs,
improved effectiveness, easier regulatory compliance, waste
minimization, and enhanced return on investment (ROI) (see [\#](#)).

Harvard Business School Professor Rebecca Henderson indicates that
businesses must adopt a shared value orientation. Doing well and doing
good are mutually dependent. Companies cannot do good if they are not
doing well. Companies with strong ESG programs outperform the market
long-term despite the short-term investment.

PepsiCo developed its sustainability program under former CEO Indra
Nooyi. Nooyi understood the benefits of purpose to planet, people, and
profits. PepsiCo focuses on agriculture, water, packaging, product,
climate, and people to create systemic change within PepsiCo and the
broader environment. The results of this work are outlined in an annual
sustainability metrics report that holds PepsiCo accountable for its
purpose. The company earned over \$70 billion in net revenue in 2020,
illustrating the shared value opportunity.

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
PepsiCo and Its Purpose-Driven Strategy
:::

Read more about PepsiCo and its commitment to sustainability in its
[2021 ESG Report](#) and its [ESG Performance Metrics report](#).
::::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# Enhanced Brand Recognition {#sect-00003}

Brands that incorporate purpose earn enhanced brand recognition for that
work, which can become a competitive advantage and result in higher
profitability. Patagonia is a prime example of a company known for its
sustainability programs. Its founder, Yvon Chouinard, envisioned the
company as a pillar of sustainability and set the stage for other
companies to follow. Patagonia sells outdoor wear that is durable and
designed around sustainability. The brand will repair its goods to avoid
customers purchasing new ones when they reuse them. It also donates 1
percent of annual sales to good causes worldwide. Finally, Patagonia
facilitates an Action Works website that connects interested parties
with local environmental protection groups to promote activism. These
sustainability activities are critical to ensuring that Patagonia is a
brand with a purpose.

# Reduced Costs {#sect-00004}

Sustainability practices often carry an up-front investment; however,
over time, these costs typically return a cost reduction. A survey by
Bain & Company indicates five times revenue growth among all brands
scoring highest on sustainability. This is possible because
sustainability programs mean reduced materials, recycling programs, and
lower use of natural resources, which are all good for the planet and
reduce production costs.

For example, Ben & Jerry's stopped using plastic straws and spoons in
its stores. This reduction strategy was good for the planet while also
decreasing expenses for the business, demonstrating that planet and
profits can be mutually beneficial. Founders Ben Cohen and Jerry
Greenfield set forth a product, economic, and social mission for the
business. In response to the success seen from Ben & Jerry's, the
"triple bottom line" mission has been adopted by many organizations that
seek to align profit, planet, and people.

# Improved Effectiveness {#sect-00005}

Sustainability practices can improve organization effectiveness. For
example, investing in human capital is an area of importance because
potential new employees consider purpose, well-being, culture,
diversity, equity, and inclusion when deciding where to work. Mastercard
is an organization that prioritizes its people, and it sees improved
effectiveness as a result. Mastercard saw an average annual profit
growth of nearly 19 percent in the 10 years it connected purpose to
profits.

The Anya Hindmarch company brought attention to the excessive use of
plastic bags in 2007 with its "I Am Not a Plastic Bag" campaign. The
campaign sought to replace plastic bags with an eco-friendly alternative
that reuses existing materials. Since 2007, companies have followed suit
with reusable tote bags that serve as both a sustainability measure and
a means of advertising their brands.

:::: {#note-00009 .note}
::: title
Anya Hindmarch and Antidote
:::

Anya Hindmarch's "I Am Not a Plastic Bag" campaign was a collaboration
with Antidote, a creative agency, that gained loads of press coverage.
That publicity contributed to the U.K. decision to charge for plastic
bags. Read more about the campaign from the [Anya Hindmarch website](#)
and [Antidote's website](#). When you're finished, take a moment to be
inspired by Anya Hindmarch and her recent sustainability fashion
product, [a collection of biodegradable leather bags](#).
::::

# Easier Compliance with Regulators {#sect-00006}

In addition to returning value to shareholders, companies are also
responsible for following international, national, and local laws. A
sustainability agenda goes beyond companies' legal obligations and
extends to serving the world better. This strategy eases compliance by
going above and beyond what is expected by government agencies. For
example, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) provides
regulatory information by sector to provide businesses with clear
regulatory compliance criteria.

:::: {#note-00010 .note}
::: title
EPA Regulatory Information
:::

If you're interested in learning more about the EPA's regulatory
information and its compliance criteria per industry, [check out this
regulatory information by business sector](#).
::::

# Waste Minimization {#sect-00007}

Environmental measures can reduce waste, creating a healthier planet.
Many organizations are focused on waste minimization to demonstrate a
commitment to the Earth. For example, McDonald's has set a waste
minimization goal of having 100 percent guest packaging derived from
renewable, recycled, or certified sources by 2025. This is impactful
because single-use plastics are a known source of waste, particularly in
the oceans where plastic outnumbers fish in some regions.

# Enhanced Return on Investment {#sect-00008}

As with any business strategy, goals and metrics are also important with
a sustainability strategy. Organizations expect a return on investment
when resources are committed, even with sustainability work.
Organizations can look at several factors to determine the financial
return on sustainability efforts. They will evaluate the increased
interest from investors, changes in brand value, and revenue.
Additionally, organizations can consider the well-being of their
employees, their impact on the planet, and their efforts to improve the
world as another key measure of success (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00009}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00010}

:::: {#rf-018 .note}
::: title
:::

18\.

Natalie Chladek, "Why You Need Sustainability in Your Business
Strategy,"

Business Insights

(blog), November 6, 2019,
https://online.hbs.edu/blog/post/business-sustainability-strategies.
::::

:::: {#rf-019 .note}
::: title
:::

19\.

PepsiCo,

"

2021 ESG Summary Overview," June 28, 2022,
https://www.pepsico.com/docs/default-source/sustainability-and-esg-topics/2021-esg-summary/pep_csr21_summary_v5a.pdf?sfvrsn=c61afffa_0.
::::

:::: {#rf-020 .note}
::: title
:::

20\.

"Environmental & Social Footprint," Patagonia, accessed April 29, 2022,
https://www.patagonia.com/our-footprint/.
::::

:::: {#rf-021 .note}
::: title
:::

21\.

Jenny Davis-Peccoud and Magali Deryckere, "How Sustainable Brands Add
Value," Bain & Company, October 4, 2021,
https://www.bain.com/insights/how-sustainable-brands-add-value-snap-chart/.
::::

:::: {#rf-022 .note}
::: title
:::

22\.

"Sustainable Packaging," Ben & Jerry's, accessed December 6, 2021,
https://www.benjerry.com/values/how-we-do-business/sustainable-packaging.
::::

:::: {#rf-023 .note}
::: title
:::

23\.

"Resources to Change the Working World," World at Work, accessed
December 6, 2021,
https://worldatwork.org/workspan/articles/case-study-advancing-purpose-driven-total-rewards-at-mastercard.
::::

:::: {#rf-024 .note}
::: title
:::

24\.

"I'm Not a Plastic Bag," Anya Hindmarch, accessed April 29, 2022,
https://us.anyahindmarch.com/pages/im-not-a-plastic-bag.
::::

:::: {#rf-025 .note}
::: title
:::

25\.

Sara Napolitano Matz, "Companies Working to Reduce Single-Use Plastics,"
U.S. Chamber of Commerce Foundation, accessed January 3, 2019,
https://www.uschamberfoundation.org/blog/post/companies-working-reduce-single-use-plastics.
::::

# 

purpose-driven strategy

strategy in which companies work to make a difference in their
communities through their decisions and support of environmental
programs
