m00134

e3d02fbb-002a-4834-bd2b-99da18ada0f0

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

List the principles of sustainable marketing.

Explain how these principles are put into practice.

# Consumer-Oriented Marketing {#sect-00002}

Consumer-oriented marketing is a solution focused on a customer's need.
The product is designed to solve a problem, distributed for convenience,
and promoted as a solution to the consumer's needs. A consumer-oriented
marketing strategy requires extensive marketing research to understand
the consumer's needs. Organizations then must design the four Ps around
those needs. Finally, a consumer-oriented marketing strategy requires
customer service and feedback to ensure that consumer needs are met.
Zappos is known for having a customer-oriented marketing strategy. With
its strategy, it focuses heavily on customer service and has assembled
an extensive team that solves any issue a consumer may face with an
order.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
Consumer-Oriented Marketing
:::

Numerous companies are well-known for their consumer-oriented marketing
approaches. Read this succinct summary on what Starbucks, Patagonia,
Zappos, Amazon, and Nordstrom are specifically doing [to understand
their customer's journey and build customer loyalty](#).

For a deeper look into Zappos' strategy, [read this article from
Entrepreneur](#) that outlines nine steps to Zappos' exceptional
service.
::::

# Customer-Value Marketing {#sect-00003}

Customer-value marketing seeks to provide the customer with maximum
utility compared to competitors. Customers make a value exchange when
purchasing a product, so they naturally ask themselves whether the cost
is worth the value of the transaction. This does not mean that all
customer-value products and services are inexpensive. In fact, the high
price of a product might be an intentional choice by the company to
attract a specific target audience. For example, Tiffany & Co. has
created a luxury brand around its jewelry's value to customers.

# Innovative Marketing {#sect-00004}

Innovative marketing uses media as a method for capturing shoppers'
attention and converting them into customers. The ever-changing digital
landscape offers myriad possibilities to engage an audience in an
innovative marketing strategy. For example, Shedd Aquarium in Chicago
took its penguins on a field trip to meet their aquatic roommates for a
virtual event in 2020. During the field trip, the Aquarium broadcasted
on social media and delighted animal lovers worldwide while promoting
the aquarium.

# Mission Marketing {#sect-00005}

Mission-driven marketing aligns purpose and brand. With mission-driven
marketing, a company uses its core mission and purpose as the focus of
its marketing strategies.

A mission-driven organization can be a for-profit or nonprofit,
governmental or nongovernmental, public or private, or religious entity.

Charity: Water is an outstanding example of a mission-driven
organization that uses marketing to inspire its audience. Its mission is
to bring clean water to communities that face a clean water crisis. The
founder, Scott Harrison, has his own story that inspires the mission,
and storytelling is integral to implementing charity: water's marketing
strategy.

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
Charity: Water
:::

Charity: water has raised more than \$640 million and funded more than
91,000 water projects in 29 countries. Watch this video about Scott
Harrison's journey and witness his storytelling abilities as he shares
his personal experience around the impact of dirty water.

[Scott Harrison\'s Mission to Eradicate the Global Water Crisis](#)
::::

# Societal Marketing {#sect-00006}

Societal marketing is most akin to the sustainability strategies
discussed in this chapter. A societal marketing strategy fulfills social
responsibility obligations while satisfying customer needs. Athleta, a
Gap company, sells premium-priced performance apparel to female
athletes. Its product is designed for a target audience of women in
motion. Athleta launched a *Power of She* campaign to celebrate the
diversity of women and serve as a societal marketing effort.
Additionally, approximately 70 percent of Athleta's apparel is
manufactured from recycled and sustainable materials.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00007}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00008}

:::: {#rf-026 .note}
::: title
:::

26\.

Gap, Inc., "Global Sustainability Report," 2020,
https://www.gapinc.com/CMSPages/GetAzureFile.aspx?path=\~\\gapcorporatesite\\media\\images\\values\\sustainability\\documents\\gap-inc-2019-report_1.pdf&hash=62614e2d67a5330d0baca5f0bacc53f4934d652f64d85a89728509b20c7e7b64.
::::

# 

consumer-oriented marketing

marketing strategies focused on customer needs and solving their
problems

customer-value marketing

marketing strategies in which a company works to provide the customer
with maximum value compared to competitors

innovative marketing

marketing strategies that use media as the method for capturing
prospects' attention and converting them into customers

mission-driven marketing

marketing strategies that align purpose and brand by using the corporate
core mission and purpose as their focus

societal marketing

a marketing strategy focused on fulfilling social responsibility
obligations while also satisfying customer needs
