m00135

949644d7-429c-49fc-a532-9efb740b5007

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Understand issues related to purpose-driven marketing.

Articulate best practices in purpose-driven marketing.

# Brand Purpose {#sect-00002}

Brands satisfy many people, from employees to investors, to customers,
to suppliers, and to the communities that they serve. These parties ask
for more than a good product at a fair price. They ask for a brand to
stand for something more than the product or service being offered.
Brand purpose is developed deep in the DNA of an organization and should
be infused in everything the brand says and does.

Accenture conducted a global survey of 30,000 consumers about brand
purpose. It found that 62 percent of customers want companies to take a
stand on issues such as sustainability, transparency, or fair working
conditions. Furthermore, the brand purpose should align closely with the
consumer's values to create an optimal purchase choice. Consumers are
willing to switch brands if their values do not align.

The challenge runs deep. People expect brands to connect to a deep
purpose; however, they are intolerant of brands who do so
inauthentically. Walmart is an example of a company that received
backlash from customers because of what they felt was not authentic. In
May 2022, Walmart launched an ice cream flavor for the upcoming
Juneteenth holiday. Consumers felt that Walmart was trying to sell a
product rather than honor an important day in history. This example
demonstrates the importance of holding a purpose at the center of the
brand instead of using it as a means of selling a product.

Bombas knows how to build purpose into its DNA. The innovative,
purpose-driven brand built its business on donating socks and underwear
to homeless shelters with each purchase. As of this writing, Bombas has
donated over 5 million items with the help of 3,500 impact partners in
every state. Its message is simple: you buy socks, they give socks.
Purpose is at the heart of Bombas's organizational mission, and it will
share it with anyone who will listen.

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
More about Walmart and Bombas
:::

There are numerous articles about Walmart and the Juneteenth backlash.
Here are two worth reading so you can gain better insight into the
customer's perspective:

CNN,

Walmart Apologizes for Selling Juneteenth Ice Cream

New York Daily News,

Walmart's Juneteenth Ice Cream Leaves a Bad Aftertaste

CNN Business interviewed the founders of Bombas to learn more about
their work to provide homeless people with socks. Check out [this video
about how Bombas integrates purpose and business](#).
::::

# Brands That Put Purpose First {#sect-00003}

The brands that put purpose at the center create ways for their
customers to experience purpose. Dove was a pioneer in brand purpose
when it developed its Campaign for Real Beauty. Marketing research
uncovered that young girls were impacted by media's standards of beauty.
Dove took this insight and decided to tackle a systemic societal
problem. This multi-decade campaign led to a celebration of all types of
beauty, redefining how we think of women and impacting self-esteem.
Customers could experience purpose because the Campaign for Real Beauty
was all about them. The Campaign for Real Beauty was more than just
advertising; it reflected who Dove wanted to be in the world.

:::: {#note-00006 .note}
::: title
Dove's Campaign for Real Beauty
:::

Dove's campaign included several ads and commercials. Seeing examples of
how companies focus on purpose will help your creativity in future
marketing jobs. Explore the commercials created by Dove:

Real Beauty Sketches, a commercial that artistically compares the gap
between self-perception with perception from others

[Dove \-- Real Beauty Sketch Commercial](#)

Anti-photoshopping film

Evolution

, a very popular and viral commercial of a behind-the-scenes look at
what happens with beauty ads

[No. 1 Dove: Campaign for Real Beauty](#)

Reverse Selfie, a commercial about the impact of social media on young
girls' self-esteem

[Reverse Selfie: Social Media\'s Impact on Girls\' Self-Esteem \|
Dove](#)

Why was this campaign so successful? There are numerous articles and
opinion pieces that provide insight into its success. Read these two out
for a sampling:

Global Brands,

The Success of Dove's Real Beauty Campaign

Digital Marketing Institute,

Dove: A Spotless Approach to Digital Marketing
::::

Purpose-driven brands speak up, even when it's difficult or costly to do
so. If you read the news, you may see brands taking a stand on social
issues. Russia's war on Ukraine in 2022 urged several American companies
to cease operations in Russia. It can be costly to cease operations in a
country as large and populous as Russia, but companies such as Starbucks
and McDonald's decided that their purpose was more important than their
profits in this case.

Brands with purpose are intentional about inclusion. While exclusivity
can be an effective marketing tactic for luxury brands, purpose-driven
brands know that inclusivity is paramount. Procter & Gamble is known as
a company that weaves inclusion into the fabric of its organization,
from its hiring practices to the use of its paid media.

:::: {#note-00007 .note}
::: title
Procter & Gamble Prioritizes People
:::

Visit Procter & Gamble's (P&G) ["Explore Our Stories" web page](#) to
view how the company prioritizes inclusion and creates opportunities for
all people. Read three to five stories and consider what P&G is saying
about who and what it values. Also, look at the partners that P&G
collaborates with to create change in its communities.
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00004}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00005}

Sustainable marketing is an effort by companies to run their business to
serve the customers of today while preserving the world for the
customers of tomorrow. Companies are increasingly following an ESG, or
environmental, social, governance, structure to bring transparency to
their sustainability efforts. Sustainable marketing uses the main
drivers of traditional marketing such as customer satisfaction, but it
considers a broader set of impacted groups. There are myriad benefits to
sustainable marketing as it relates to brand equity, financial measures,
and government compliance. Purpose-driven brands stand for something
more than what they sell, and they build their organization around that
stated purpose.

#  {#sect-00006}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00007}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00008}

A workplace study by Blue Beyond Consulting shows that 8 in 10 employees
say that it's important that their employer's values align with their
values. Furthermore, more than 75 percent of respondents indicated that
they expect their employer and business to be a force for good.

Consider what you value and how you would like your future employer to
honor those values. Research a few organizations to find an employer
that closely aligns with your values. Write about how you might
integrate your personal purpose with that of your employer to make the
change that you wish to see in the world.

# Endnotes {#sect-00009}

:::: {#rf-027 .note}
::: title
:::

27\.

Rachel Barton, "From Me to We: The Rise of the Purpose-Led Brand,"
Accenture Strategy Research Report, December 5, 2018.
https://www.accenture.com/us-en/insights/strategy/brand-purpose.
::::

:::: {#rf-028 .note}
::: title
:::

28\.

Jordan Valinsky, "Walmart Apologizes for Selling Juneteenth Ice Cream,"
CNN Business, updated May 24, 2022,
https://www.cnn.com/2022/05/24/business-food/walmart-juneteenth-ice-cream/index.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-029 .note}
::: title
:::

29\.

Home page, Bombas, accessed June 7, 2022, http://www.bombas.com/.
::::

:::: {#rf-030 .note}
::: title
:::

30\.

"Dove Campaigns," Dove, accessed June 7, 2022,
https://www.dove.com/us/en/stories/campaigns.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-031 .note}
::: title
:::

31\.

Beyond Blue Consulting, "'The Great Resignation': A Majority of
Employees Would Quit Their Job - And Only 1 in 4 Workers Would Accept
One - If Company Values Do Not Align with Personal Values." Cision PR
Newswire, October 20, 2021,
https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/the-great-resignation-a-majority-of-employees-would-quit-their-job-and-only-1-in-4-workers-would-accept-one-if-company-values-do-not-align-with-personal-values-301404919.html.
::::
