m00063

8e0da640-cc5e-43e4-81cd-561d45cf87ed

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Swarovski, a well-known company that specializes in crystal cutting,
developed a campaign around diversity and acceptance a few years ago in
an effort to reach worldwide customers. One such campaign that was
launched during the holiday season in China focused on the Advent
calendar despite the fact that the observance of Advent is primarily a
Western tradition. If you're not familiar with Advent calendars, they're
a type of calendar that counts down the days from December 1 to December
25, Christmas day. On each day in December, you open a pouch or flap on
the calendar where a small candy or toy is included. Swarovski took the
concept to a whole new level.

The Swarovski Advent calendar retailed for \$458 and contained 25
individual compartments with Swarovski crystals. You might be thinking
that the price is a little high, but think again---the market supported
the price, and the calendars sold out quickly. While the physical Advent
calendars took off in the market, so did the digital version. With the
digital calendar, users would play interactive games, earn game cards,
and then swap the cards with other people. After they collected seven
unique cards, they could turn them in to Swarovski for a gift.

Later in this chapter, we're going to explore some measurement metrics
for determining the success of new product launches, but one immediate
indicator that a product launch was successful is a quick sellout. For
Swarovski, the fact that their Advent calendar sold out so quickly is a
testament to the successful product launch.

# Endnotes {#sect-00001}

:::: {#rf-001 .note}
::: title
:::

1\.

"December Holiday Campaigns That Caught Our Eye," AgencyChina, January
9, 2018,
https://agencychina.com/blog/december-holiday-campaigns-that-caught-our-eye/.
::::
