m00064

32b9e5d9-74bf-472f-94db-16507ac2553e

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define a new product.

Explain "newness" from the perspective of the customer.

Explain the risks and rewards of developing new products.

# New Product Defined {#sect-00002}

You've probably watched at least one episode of the popular television
show *Shark Tank*, where budding entrepreneurs pitch their business
plans to a panel of investors in return for funding. To date, over 1,000
sales pitches have been made on the show---some forgettable, others
memorable---and some pitches have resulted in wildly successful
businesses. Some of Shark Tank's most successful products include the
Squatty Potty (over \$200 million in sales since appearing on *Shark
Tank*), Bombas Socks (over \$225 million), and Scrub Daddy (over \$330
million).

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
Shark Tank
:::

You will learn a lot about new products and their development by
watching *Shark Tank*. [You can watch the episodes online here](#).
Interested in learning which *Shark Tank* products have been most
successful? Check out these stories:

Shark Tank Tales:

"12 Most Successful Shark Tank Products"

Good Housekeeping:

"Top 42 Gifts That Got Their Start on Shark Tank"

Entrepreneur:

"Shark Tank"

Vulture:

"Shark Tank Contestant Who Pitched Face Masks in 2009 Has No Regrets"

Looper:

"The Most Expensive Deals on Shark Tank"

Hustle Story:

"21 Most Famous Shark Tank Failures in 2022"

Failory:

"Shark Tank: 7 Products That Failed & Their 3 Biggest Mistakes"

Bplans:

"5 Lessons Shark Tank Can Teach You About Pitching to Angel Investors"
::::

Perhaps you've got an idea for a new product that's going to take the
world by storm. If so, this chapter will be especially relevant for you.
We're going to explore everything about new products in this chapter:
the stages of new product development, what facets of those new products
contribute to their success or failure, how consumers adopt new
products, and more.

You would think that a "new product" would be an easy definition, but
the term can mean different things. In fact, there are five different
categories of new products (see [\#](#)), each one unique.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Let's look at these new product categories in more detail.

New-to-the-World Products

: New-to-the-world products essentially are new inventions that create
new markets. Some examples from products recently introduced include
biomagnetic ear stickers for weight loss, cat self-groomers, and
portable blenders.

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

New-to-the-Firm Products

: These are products that are new to a company but not to the world.
It's likely that marketers have seen a gap in the market and their
product line and attempted to fill that void by adding a "me-too" type
of product to their product line. For example,

Nature Valley

originally only made granola cereal but later introduced granola bars
that could be eaten "on the go."

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

There's a perfect example of a company that saw a gap in the market and
added a product that wasn't new to the world, but it certainly was new
to Nature Valley.

Additions to Existing Product Lines

: Recall that a product line is a group of related products marketed
under a single brand. Additions to existing product lines are simple
product line extensions, designed to "flesh out" the product line.
During its 130+ years in business,

Coca-Cola

has launched a number of product line extensions. The next time you're
in a supermarket, look on the shelves in the soft drink aisle. You'll
likely see a number of different flavors and styles of Coca-Cola
varieties, such as Coca-Cola Cherry, Coca-Cola Cherry Vanilla, Coca-Cola
Vanilla, Coca-Cola Zero, and more.

:::: {#note-00005 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Improvements and Revisions to Existing Products

: This is when existing products are improved. Think about how many
times you've seen "new and improved" on the packaging of a product that
you've been using for a while, like laundry detergent. As a concrete
example,

Meta

(formerly

Facebook

) released its Oculus Quest 2 VR (virtual reality) headset and
controllers late in 2021, which was simply an updated version of its
original Oculus Quest.

:::: {#note-00006 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

:::: {#note-00007 .note}
::: title
Oculus Quest 2
:::

Are you new to VR and would like to see what you can do with the Oculus
Quest 2 device? Check out this short video where Meta Quest uses YouTube
to market the features and benefits of using the Oculus 2. Meta Quest
also provides tons of videos about how you can use the Oculus 2 in
fitness, gaming, social experiences, and space exploration. [Check out
those Meta Quest videos here.](#)

[Explore the All-in-One VR System Oculus Quest 2 \| Oculus](#)
::::

Repositioned Products

: Another reminder: product positioning is the process that defines how
your product is different from others on the market.

:::: {#note-00008 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Repositioned products are those that are retargeted for a new use or
application. For example,

Bayer

repositioned its aspirin from treating headaches, fever, and
inflammation to also safeguarding against heart attacks.

:::: {#note-00009 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

# Customer Perceptions of Newness {#sect-00003}

Just as there are different ways to categorize new products, there are
different customer perceptions of newness. The difference in these
perceptions is the result of how much change they cause in a consumer's
existing habits. Newness can be categorized three ways:

Discontinuous Innovation:

Sometimes referred to as radical or disruptive innovations,

discontinuous innovations

consist of new-to-the-world products that are so different from products
currently existing in the market that they require a significant change
in consumer behavior when adopted. For example, think about how cell
phones have changed the way we communicate today. Older cell phones did
one thing---make and receive phone calls. With a smartphone, you can
still make phone calls, but you can also listen to music, send and
receive emails, surf the Internet, conduct online banking, and get
driving directions, to name just a few. Consider how learning to operate
all the features on your smartphone required you to change your
behavior.

:::: {#note-00010 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Continuous Innovation:

This is the other end of the spectrum from discontinuous innovation.
With

continuous innovation

, the existing product undergoes marginal changes and doesn't alter
customer habits. For example, when

Sony

introduced new TVs that promised sharper, brighter TV pictures, the
picture quality was better, but as a consumer, it didn't require you to
change your TV viewing habits.

:::: {#note-00011 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Dynamically Continuous Innovation:

With

dynamically continuous innovation

, some changes in consumer habits are necessary, but the changes aren't
as large or small as you see with the two other types of innovation. For
example, manual and even electric typewriters have gone the way of the
dinosaur since the advent of PCs, but the keyboard layout remained the
same, so little change was required with consumer habits.

# Risks and Rewards of Developing New Products {#sect-00004}

We started this chapter with a discussion of *Shark Tank* and some of
the products that have been successful in the market as a result of the
television show. However, not all products are successful, and there are
both risks and rewards when developing new products.

## Rewards of Developing New Products {#sect-00005}

You have probably heard the saying "No risk, no reward," and nothing
could be truer in terms of new product development. However, a company's
ability to maintain its competitive edge in the market requires a
delicate balance between the necessity and the challenges of new product
development.

We've already looked at Swarovski's successful product launch of its
Advent calendar, but let's consider a few other examples to show you
just how rewarding a well-executed product launch can be. Instagram, the
social networking platform that allows users to share photos and videos,
was first released in October 2010, and it quickly racked up 25,000
users in one day. The company now boasts that it has more than 1 billion
(that's with a "b") monthly active users. Instagram succeeded by
introducing bold features in its platform, from video editing features
to interactive features like face filters and polling.

And, of course, we can't talk about successful product launches without
mentioning Apple, whose original iPhone was one of the most successful
product launches in history---racking up 1 million units sold within
just 74 days of its launch.

Keeping the success of these products in mind, let's look at the reasons
why products succeed.

Targeting New Markets:

New product development gives businesses the opportunity to expand into
new markets, providing an opportunity to connect with different target
markets. This creates the added benefit of growing their customer base.
For example, research from the

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)

indicated that Americans were reporting symptoms of anxiety and
depression since COVID-19 came about, so

PepsiCo

launched two new drinks that claim to support relaxation---Driftwell and
Soulboost.

:::: {#note-00014 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Increasing Market Share:

Think about market share as a pizza, and every company that participates
in the market has a slice (obviously some slices are bigger than
others). As the market grows, a company needs to expand with it in order
to keep its share of that pizza, but it can also increase its market
share---and take another slice or two of pizza---through new product
development.

Increasing Revenue Stream:

Revenue streams

are all the ways a company can generate cash from the sale of its
products or services. New products and/or services will create
additional revenue streams that will generate extra income for the
business, perhaps spurring even more new product development. For
example, Apple generates revenue streams by developing new hardware
products such as the Apple Watch and AirPods wireless headphones, and
the company enjoys recurring revenues from services such as iCloud,
Apple Music, and Apple TV+.

## Risks of Developing New Products {#sect-00006}

Developing new products has many unforeseen issues and surprises, so it
should come as no surprise to you that there are some significant risks
associated with these efforts.

*Lack of Differentiation:* There can be many problems with the design of
a product, including insufficient differentiation from competitors'
products. Perhaps the product or service did not solve enough problems
or did not solve them sufficiently, or the product incompletely
addresses the needs of the target market.

For example, in 2021 Apple discontinued its HomePod smart speaker, which
was not perceived as being sufficiently different from Amazon's Echo
despite offering high-quality music playback.

*Financial Feasibility:* New product development is expensive and can be
financially risky for companies. It's important that a financial
feasibility study is conducted in the earliest stages of new product
development to determine whether it's worth launching the product or
service in the context of sales and revenues.

Financial feasibility is the primary reason why pharmaceutical companies
typically don't invest large amounts of money in developing a new drug
if the market for the drug is small. Novartis was the exception to this
rule. The company developed a drug that treats children under the age of
two suffering from spinal muscular atrophy (SMA). According to the
Cleveland Clinic, only 1 in 10,000 children suffer from this rare
genetic mutation, but Novartis went ahead and developed the drug anyway.
With a price tag of \$2,125,000 for a one-dose treatment, it's the most
expensive drug the world has ever seen. You may be asking yourself, Is
it worth it? Just ask the parents of a child suffering from SMA.

*Technical Feasibility:* Technical feasibility studies are equally
important as a financial feasibility study. Does the organization have
the technical resources to meet capacity? Can the technical team convert
the idea into a working product or service?

For example, while Taco Bell's Doritos Loco Taco was in development, the
team wasn't sure it was technically possible to coat a taco shell with
the iconic Doritos flavoring. Its research and development (R&D)
department spent approximately two years developing over 40 prototype
taco shells before it found the right combination of crunch, seasoning,
and flavor.

*Poor Timing:* Author Joshua Harris once wrote, "The right thing at the
wrong time is the wrong thing." This couldn't be truer when it comes to
new product development. You may have developed the best product or
service, but if it's introduced to the market at the wrong time, it's
likely to fail. The product development process can take a year or
longer, and imagine the market changes that can take place during that
time. A new competitor may enter the market before you do, consumer
preferences and needs can change, legislative or environmental
regulations can change, or the economy can go south before you're ready
to launch.

The situation with in-home COVID-19 testing kits is a perfect example of
poor timing. By the time the US government made these kits widely
available to the public, the need for these tests had greatly diminished
because the majority of the population had already been vaccinated.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00007}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00008}

:::: {#rf-002 .note}
::: title
:::

2\.

"12 Most Successful Shark Tank Products," Shark Tank Tales, accessed
January 8, 2022,
https://sharktanktales.com/best-selling-most-successful-shark-tank-products/.
::::

:::: {#rf-003 .note}
::: title
:::

3\.

Nicole Martins Ferreira, "15 Best New Products You Need to Know About,"
Oberlo, October 26, 2020, https://www.oberlo.com/blog/new-products.
::::

:::: {#rf-004 .note}
::: title
:::

4\.

"About Us," Nature Valley, accessed June 12, 2022,
https://www.naturevalley.com/about-us.
::::

:::: {#rf-005 .note}
::: title
:::

5\.

Desirae Odjick, "Product Line Extensions: What They Are, Examples, and
Tips for Forming Your Strategy," Shopify Blog, June 24, 2021,
https://www.shopify.com/blog/product-line-extensions.
::::

:::: {#rf-006 .note}
::: title
:::

6\.

"Oculus Quest 2: Our Most Advanced New All-in-One VR Headset," Meta,
accessed January 18, 2022, https://www.oculus.com/quest-2/.
::::

:::: {#rf-007 .note}
::: title
:::

7\.

Maximilian Claessens, "Categories of New Products---What Is a New
Product?" Marketing-Insider, September 18, 2016,
https://marketing-insider.eu/categories-of-new-products/.
::::

:::: {#rf-008 .note}
::: title
:::

8\.

Ian Mullaney, "Teaching Old Drugs New Tricks: Why Companies Reposition
Medicines,"

The Conversation

, February 12, 2012,
https://theconversation.com/teaching-old-drugs-new-tricks-why-companies-reposition-medicines-4621.
::::

:::: {#rf-009 .note}
::: title
:::

9\.

Katrina Grant, "How Have Cell Phones Changed Communication?" Techwalla,
accessed January 18, 2022,
https://www.techwalla.com/articles/how-have-cell-phones-changed-communication.
::::

:::: {#rf-010 .note}
::: title
:::

10\.

Kishore Shenoy, "Difference between Continuous Innovations and
Discontinuous Innovations," LinkedIn, March 18, 2018,
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/difference-between-continuous-innovations-kishore-shenoy-ranjal/.
::::

:::: {#rf-011 .note}
::: title
:::

11\.

Frederik Bussler, "10 Successful Product Launches to Inspire Product
Innovation," Commerce.AI, accessed June 12, 2022,
https://www.commerce.ai/blog/10-successful-product-launches-to-inspire-product-innovation.
::::

:::: {#rf-012 .note}
::: title
:::

12\.

Bussler.
::::

:::: {#rf-013 .note}
::: title
:::

13\.

Ellen Byron, "Companies Target a New Market: The Stressed Out,"

The Wall Street Journal

, July 10, 2021,
https://www.wsj.com/articles/companies-target-a-new-market-the-stressed-out-11625889712.
::::

:::: {#rf-014 .note}
::: title
:::

14\.

"Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA)," Cleveland Clinic, accessed June 12,
2022,
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/14505-spinal-muscular-atrophy-sma#:\~:text=How%20common%20is%20spinal%20muscular,of%206%2C000%20to%2010%2C000%20children.
::::

:::: {#rf-015 .note}
::: title
:::

15\.

John Cumbers, "Why Some Drugs Cost \$2.1 Million per Dose and How One
Company Plans to Change This,"

Forbes

, December 16, 2021,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/johncumbers/2021/12/16/why-some-drugs-cost-21-million-per-dose-and-how-one-company-plans-to-change-this/?sh=58a0f9898953.
::::

:::: {#rf-016 .note}
::: title
:::

16\.

Caitlyn Hitt, "The Well-Seasoned History of Taco Bell's Doritos Locos
Taco," Thrillist. August 11, 2020,
https://www.thrillist.com/news/nation/history-of-taco-bell-doritos-locos-tacos.
::::

# 

additions to existing product lines

product line extensions that involve changes to styles or flavors

continuous innovation

category of "newness" in which the existing product undergoes only
marginal changes that do not alter consumer habits

discontinuous innovation

new-to-the-world products that require a significant change in consumer
behavior when adopted

dynamically continuous innovation

changes to a product or service that require little change to consumer
habits

improvements and revisions to existing products

improvements to existing products that fine tune or perfect them

new-to-the-firm products

products that are new to a company but not to the world

new-to-the-world products

new product inventions that create new markets

repositioned products

products that are retargeted for a new use

revenue streams

all the ways in which a company can generate cash flow from the sale of
its products or services
