m00065

124a90d2-52df-4c41-afbf-c21290d1fc62

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify the stages of the new product development process.

Define and describe the important factors of each stage of development.

# The New Product Development Process {#sect-00002}

The new product development process involves activities where a company
thinks of a new product concept and introduces a new product offering.
New product development usually follows a process divided into stages
(see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

*Stage 1:* Idea Generation. With idea generation, you are working to
create as many ideas as you can. The purpose of this stage is to focus
on the products that are more likely to turn a profit so you can reduce
the product development expense later in the process and develop
profitable products.

Instead of looking at the new product development process in abstract
terms, let's discuss a potential product idea and follow it through all
the steps of the process. Imagine that you're a marketer for a food
processing company, and you believe there is a gap in the market for a
high-protein freeze-dried yogurt powder that can be added to juice to
make a nutritious, low-fat, fruit-flavored smoothie. This is what's
known as a product idea---a new product that a company could potentially
offer to the market. This idea may have been generated by internal
sources such as research and development (R&D), market research, or
employees who are not part of R&D. On the other hand, the idea may have
come from external sources such as customers, suppliers, distributors,
or even competitors.

*Stage 2:* Idea Screening and Evaluation. This is the process of
filtering through the ideas brought to the table by your team, picking
the ones that are most likely to turn a profit, and dropping the less
favorable ones. For example, with our high-protein freeze-dried yogurt
powder, the team would create numerous product concepts that they then
sift through to reach the best idea.

*Stage 3:* Concept Development and Testing. In this stage, a product
idea can be turned into several product concepts---the perception of a
new idea or innovation. The product team will consider *who* will use
the product (e.g., children, athletes, or adults), *what* benefits the
product will provide (e.g., meal replacement, a snack, nutrition, or
energy), and *when* consumers would typically consume the product (e.g.,
for breakfast, as a midmorning or afternoon snack, or after a workout or
exercise).

For example, your product team may come up with the following product
concepts for our yogurt powder:

The yogurt powder would be marketed as an instant, on-the-go breakfast
drink.

The yogurt powder would be marketed as a high-protein snack that is more
nutritious than plain juice or milk.

The yogurt powder would be marketed to adults or athletes who work out
and want to replenish the body's loss of protein during exercise.

It's important to develop these product concepts because each concept
defines the product's competition. For example, Concept #1 would compete
against other breakfast foods such as cereal, breakfast bars, toast, and
bacon and eggs. Concept #2 would compete against juice, soft drinks, and
plain milk. Concept #3 would compete against protein shakes.

Once you've developed your product concept, it's time to test that
concept with consumers in what you believe to be your target market.
This is what's known as concept testing. Concept testing is a market
research method in which customers are presented with a description of a
product or service.

Let's assume that the product concept we've chosen is the instant,
on-the-go breakfast drink. Customers in the target market would be
presented with a description of the product that may read something
like: "Our product is a high-protein powdered yogurt mixture that is
added to juice to make an instant breakfast smoothie that provides
nutrition, good taste, and convenience. The product will be offered in
individual packages, six to a box, priced at \$3.49 per box."

Potential customers will then be asked a series of screening or
qualifying questions, such as:

To what extent do you like or dislike this product?

How appealing are the attributes of the product?

How likely would you be to purchase this product?

Quite often, these (and other) questions are scored using a five-point
Likert Scale. For example, the last question might be scored on the
basis of these five options: definitely would purchase; likely would
purchase; may or may not purchase; unlikely to purchase; and definitely
would not purchase. The answers to these questions suggest if the
product will likely be successful in the market or not. If the answers
are generally positive, the product concept will move to the next stage;
if the answers are less than positive, the product concept will likely
be rejected.

*Stage 4:* Market Strategy Development. Once concept testing has been
completed and the decision has been made to proceed further, it's time
for the product team to develop a preliminary marketing strategy plan.
This plan will address the target market for the product. It will
outline product positioning, pricing, distribution, promotion, budget,
and both short- and long-term goals for sales, market share, and profit.

*Stage 5:* Business Analysis. Armed with the preliminary marketing
strategy plan, the company now needs to assess the new product's
business appeal. For example, the company will want to know if sales
will be sufficient for the company to make the desired profit. The
company will need to understand the costs involved in the new product
development in terms of research and development, manufacturing, and
marketing.

There are a couple of different analyses that can be done:

Payback: This simply refers to the time frame within which the company
can expect to recover the investment it made in the product development
process.

Break-even analysis: This analysis determines how many units must be
sold before the company recoups its costs and starts making a profit.

These analyses are performed so that management can now determine if
anticipated profits from the sale of the breakfast drink mix will
satisfy company objectives. If the answer is yes, the product concept
moves on to the next stage, product development. If the answer is no,
the product concept is shelved.

*Stage 6:* Product Development. Remember that, until now, our product
concept has existed only as words or perhaps a drawing. If our breakfast
drink mix has passed the business analysis test, it will now move into
the product development stage, and engineering will develop a physical
version of the product, called a prototype.

It's important to note that sometimes the company realizes in this stage
that the product concept simply can't be translated into a commercially
feasible product. For example, through market research, Maxwell House
determined that consumers wanted a coffee that was "bold, vigorous, and
deep tasting." However, after working with coffee blends for four
months, the company determined that it was too expensive to commercially
produce the formula, so Maxwell House changed the blend to meet its
targeted manufacturing cost. Unfortunately, the taste of the new blend
didn't meet consumers' expectations, and the new product flopped.

The prototype is then put through functional and customer tests to see
how well it perform. For example, at carpet manufacturer Shaw
Industries, temporary employees are paid to walk on carpet samples for
eight hours a day to see how the carpet holds up. At Gillette,
volunteers come to work unshaven so they can use certain razors, shaving
cream, or aftershave and complete questionnaires. (The "motto" of this
group is "We bleed so you'll get a good shave at home.")

*Stage 7:* Test-Marketing. If the product team is satisfied with how the
prototype performs functionally, the product concept is then
test-marketed to determine its viability before it's launched on a large
scale. Typically, the product is introduced in a limited number of
stores or in a few geographic regions in order to gauge customer
acceptance. There are several methods of consumer-goods marketing
testing, but we'll just cover a few here:

Sales-Wave Research

: This is the least costly method of test-marketing. With this method,
consumers are initially allowed to try the product at no cost. They are
then reoffered the product (or a competitor's product) at a reduced
price a number of times (i.e., sales waves). The point of this research
is to see how many consumers select the new product and record their
reported levels of satisfaction with the product.

:::: {#note-00006 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Controlled Test-Marketing

: In this type of test-marketing, the company arranges for a certain
number of stores to carry the new product. The new product is delivered
to the store, and marketers manage shelf position in the store, pricing,
point-of-purchase displays, and more. The company then measures sales
results through the scanners at checkout.

Test-Marketing

: Of course, the best (but also the most expensive) way to test a
product concept is with a full-blown market test. The company will
select a few representative cities (markets that closely resemble the
target customers) and introduce the product with a full advertising and
promotional campaign. In essence, the company is measuring the success
of the new product on a smaller scale before launching it on a national
or even global scale. Curious to know the top cities to test-market a
national product? They are Nashville, Tennessee; Cincinnati, Ohio;
Indianapolis, Indiana; Charleston, South Carolina; and Jacksonville,
Florida.

:::: {#note-00007 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Simulated Test-Markets

: With this method, consumers are exposed to simulated market situations
in order to gauge their reactions. Marketers interview consumers in two
stages: concept stage and after use. The concept stage interviews
provide the marketer with information about the product's appeal and
trial rate, whereas the post-usage interviews determine consumers'
likelihood of purchasing the product again.

Crowdsourcing

: Crowdsourcing is the practice of using the input of a large group of
people. This form of market testing would be particularly useful if your
product includes mobile apps, web apps, or websites. The product team
would choose a crowdsource testing platform, test the product, analyze
the results, and tweak the product accordingly.

:::: {#note-00008 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

*Stage 8:* Commercialization. In this stage, the company launches the
product, complete with full-scale production, distribution, advertising,
and sales promotion. The cost of launching a new product varies
depending on the product itself, the industry, and the competition.

*Stage 9:* Evaluation of Results. As we've pointed out with the
marketing metrics features in this textbook, you can't fix what you
don't measure, so it's important after commercialization for the company
to review the marketing performance of the new product. Is the new
product accepted by consumers? Is there sufficiently high demand, sales,
and profits? Are there competitors who are introducing a similar new
product in the market? Depending on the answers to these questions,
savvy marketers will closely monitor the performance of the new product
and make changes as needed in both the marketing plan and the marketing
mix strategy.

:::: {#note-00010 .note}
::: title
Product Development as a Career
:::

Most companies have product manager (PM) as a job role. In this job, you
manage the product creation or further development. Check out this
[summary of what a product developer position](#) entails, including
average salaries.

This [article from Stanford online](#) outlines what you need to know to
have a career in product management. [ZipRecruiter also outlines skills
and training needed](#) for this job role.

Many companies post job descriptions to help you prepare. Here are a few
for the product manager job role:

Google PM

Facebook (Meta) PM

Twitter PM

Amazon PM

If you're interested in learning more about the product manager job role
and career, [read here about the typical path you can expect](#).
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00003}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00004}

:::: {#rf-017 .note}
::: title
:::

17\.

Maximilian Claessens, "The New Product Development Process (NPD)---8
Steps," Marketing-Insider, January 31, 2022,
https://marketing-insider.eu/new-product-development-process/.
::::

:::: {#rf-018 .note}
::: title
:::

18\.

"Managing the Development Process Development to Commercialization,"
Zabanga Marketing, June 3, 2022,
https://www.zabanga.us/sales-force/anaging-the-development-process-development-to-commercialization.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-019 .note}
::: title
:::

19\.

"Managing the Development Process."
::::

:::: {#rf-020 .note}
::: title
:::

20\.

"Managing the Development Process."
::::

:::: {#rf-021 .note}
::: title
:::

21\.

"Many Marketers Are Now Using New Simulated Marketing Technologies,"
Zabanga Marketing, accessed July 26, 2022,
https://www.zabanga.us/customer-relationships/objective-4-sia.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-022 .note}
::: title
:::

22\.

"Consumer Goods Market Testing," Zabanga Marketing, accessed May 6,
2022,
https://www.zabanga.us/sales-force/consumergoods-market-testing.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-023 .note}
::: title
:::

23\.

Christopher Pliny, "Top U.S. Microcosm Cities to Test Market a National
Product," SmallBusiness.com, August 28, 2014,
https://smallbusiness.com/product-development/best-u-s-cities-to-test-market-a-national-product/.
::::

:::: {#rf-024 .note}
::: title
:::

24\.

Marvin Burman, "5 Ways Product Managers Can Use Crowdsourcing
Effectively," Applause, May 30, 2017,
https://www.applause.com/blog/examples-of-crowdsourcing.
::::

:::: {#rf-025 .note}
::: title
:::

25\.

Lindsay Kolowich Cox, "How to Launch a Product, According to HubSpot's
Product Marketers," HubSpot Blog, August 24, 2021,
https://blog.hubspot.com/marketing/product-launch-checklist#:\~:text=Launching%20a%20product%20can%20cost,you\'re%20hoping%20to%20achieve.
::::

# 

business analysis

the fifth step in the new product development process, in which a
potential new product is evaluated

commercialization

the eighth step in the new product development process, in which the
product is launched with full-scale production, distribution,
advertising, and sales promotion

concept development and testing

the third step in the new product development process, in which a
product concept is developed into a detailed idea

concept testing

market research method in which customers are presented with a
description of a product or service

crowdsourcing

using the input of a large group of people for market testing

evaluation of results

the ninth and final step in the new product development process, in
which a company evaluates product launch performance based on
predetermined metrics

external sources

in product development, sources of ideas for new products or services
from those outside the organization

idea generation

the first step in the new product development process, in which many new
ideas for a product are developed

idea screening and evaluation

the second step in the new product development process, in which ideas
are filtered to those most likely to turn a profit

internal sources

in product development, sources of ideas for new products or services
from those inside the organization

market strategy development

the fourth step in the new product development process, in which a
preliminary marketing strategy is developed

product concepts

perceptions of a new idea or innovation

product development

the sixth step in the new product development process, in which a
potential new product undergoes development; may include the creation of
a prototype

product idea

concept of a new product that a company could potentially offer to the
market

prototype

in new product development, the creation of a physical version of the
product

test-marketing

the seventh step in the new product development process, in which a
product concept is test-marketed to determine its viability before
launch to market
