m00066

ebc51b4b-50cf-4691-b47f-7a95a7335839

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Explain the importance of establishing new product metrics.

Describe metrics used to evaluate the success or failure of new
products.

# The Importance of Establishing New Product Metrics {#sect-00002}

There are few marketing activities that are as difficult to manage as
new product development. Not only does a company have to juggle multiple
tasks like new features and innovative technologies against factors like
cost, risk, and time to market, but it has to ensure that it's making
the most efficient use of its limited resources on new products that
will meet both its short-term and long-term strategic goals. In this
section we're going to review product development metrics that can
measure the success (or failure) of your new product launch.

Product metrics are quantifiable data that a business tracks and
analyzes to determine how successful its new product(s) are. One way
that companies accomplish this is by using key performance indicators
(KPIs). KPIs are target metrics set by a company as a way to measure if
the product is delivering on expectations. An example of a KPI could be
targeted new customers per month or revenue growth.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
KPIs
:::

If you haven't already heard the term KPI, and you plan on working at a
business, it will become a part of your language. No matter what job
role you hold in a company, KPIs are important to understand. Learn more
about KPIs from there resources:

KPI.org: "

What Is A Key Performance Indicator (KPI)?

"

HubSpot:

"How to Choose the Right KPIs for Your Business"

Toucan Toco:

"The Most Important KPIs to Track for Improved Marketing Efficiency"

The Marketing Journal:

"5 Marketing KPIs You Cannot Measure but Should Care About"

Virtual Strategist Video: "How to Develop Key Performance Indicators"

[How to Develop Key Performance Indicators](#)
::::

# Specific Metrics Used to Evaluate New Products {#sect-00003}

There are any number of metrics you can use to measure the success of a
new product. For our purposes, we're going to focus on just a few of the
more common KPIs (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Research and Development Spending as a Percentage of Sales:

This metric is used to compare the effectiveness of R&D expenditures
between companies in the same industry. It's important to use companies
within the same industry because R&D numbers vary widely based upon the
industry. For example, pharmaceutical and software companies tend to
spend considerable dollars on R&D, whereas consumer product companies
generally spend less. The percentage is calculated as R&D dollars spent
divided by total sales.

Current Year Percentage of Sales:

This method calculates cost of goods sold, inventory, cash, and other
financial line items as a percentage of sales and then applies that
percentage to future sales estimates. It's a "quick and dirty" way to
estimate the product's future value.

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Time to Value (TTV)

: Time to value refers to how long it takes new users to recognize your
product's value (sometimes referred to as the "aha!" moment in
marketing). Obviously, the sooner this occurs, the better, although time
to value varies widely depending upon the product itself.

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

For example, if you purchase a new book for your

Kindle

, it's a matter of seconds before the book is available to you. On the
other hand, if you subscribe to a magazine, it may be days or weeks
before you see your first issue.

Product Adoption Rate:

When launching a new product, this metric is almost always at or near
the top of the product team's list of KPIs to track. Product adoption
(or user adoption) is the process by which people learn about a product
and start using its features to meet their needs.

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

The formula for calculating the adoption rate: divide the number of new
users by the total number of users.

Return on Investment (ROI):

This is a metric formula used to evaluate the profitability, or overall
value, of an investment. In marketing, you can use ROI to measure the
profitability of a new product launch. To calculate the marketing ROI,
you would take the sales from that product, subtract the marketing
costs, divide by the marketing costs, and multiply by 100.

:::: {#note-00005 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

For example, if sales grew by \$100,000 as a result of the new product
launch, but the cost of the marketing campaign was \$20,000, the ROI
would be:

$$\text{Return~on~Investment~}\left( \text{ROI} \right) = \frac{\left( {\text{Sales}~ - ~\text{Costs}} \right)}{\text{Costs}}\text{~~} \times \ 100$$

 

$$\text{Return~on~Investment~}\left( \text{ROI} \right) = \frac{\left( {\text{\$}100,000~ - ~\text{\$}20,000} \right)}{\text{\$}20,000}\text{~~} \times \ 100 = 400\text{\%}$$

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00004}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00005}

:::: {#rf-026 .note}
::: title
:::

26\.

Jay Fuchs, "The Percent of Sales Method: What It Is and How to Use It,"
HubSpot Blog, May 5, 2020, from
https://blog.hubspot.com/sales/percent-of-sales-method.
::::

:::: {#rf-027 .note}
::: title
:::

27\.

Katryna Balboni, "11 Essential Product Metrics for Measuring Product-Led
Growth," Appcues Blog, accessed January 8, 2022,
https://www.appcues.com/blog/product-led-growth-metrics.
::::

:::: {#rf-028 .note}
::: title
:::

28\.

"What Is Product Adoption & How Do You Measure It Properly?" Heap,
accessed January 8, 2022,
https://heap.io/topics/what-is-product-adoption-how-do-you-measure-it-properly.
::::

:::: {#rf-029 .note}
::: title
:::

29\.

Jason Fernando, "Return on Investment (ROI): How to Calculate It and
What It Means," Investopedia, June 30, 2022,
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/r/returnoninvestment.asp.
::::

# 

product metrics

quantifiable data that a business tracks and analyzes to determine how
successful its new products are

return on investment (ROI)

a metric formula used to evaluate the profitability of an investment
and, in marketing, the measurement of the profitability of a new product
launch
