m00067

d669f182-7c4c-4a21-bd2d-3393ab63f74c

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify and discuss factors that contribute to the success of a new
product.

Identify and discuss factors that contribute to the failure of a new
product.

# What Factors Contribute to the Success of New Products? {#sect-00002}

The story about how the Dollar Shave Club was started is more than just
urban legend. Founders Mark Levin and Michael Dubin met at a party and
commiserated about how expensive razor blades were. After that party,
using their own money and investments from start-up incubator Science
Inc., they launched their website that sold razor blades much more
cheaply starting in April 2011. These founders seized an opportunity
based on several insights: that prices for blades charged by market
leader Gillette were perceived as too high; that most men do not want to
shop in stores for shaving supplies; and lastly, that the move to
online/subscription boxes was gaining traction. Five years later, the
company was bought by Unilever for an astounding \$1 billion.

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
Direct-to-Customer Sales
:::

Watch this viral video of the founders speaking about the virtues of
direct-to-customer sales. It's funny and informative. Check it out!

[WEBFILM - Our blades are fucking great](#)
::::

Instant, phenomenal, new product success is what every marketer wants to
achieve when launching a new product. But the reality is quite
different. When you look objectively at new product introduction success
or failure, significant differences emerge between successful and
unsuccessful product launches. There's a similar pattern or a recipe for
success. [\#](#) outlines the key factors that strongly influence new
product success.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Let's explore each of these factors:

Delivering Unique Benefits to Users:

The product itself---in terms of its design, features, and benefits to
customers---is the often the bellwether of new product success. Are you
introducing a "me too" product vis-à-vis the competition, or does the
new product deliver unique benefits to the consumer? It probably comes
as no surprise that innovative products typically fare better than those
that have few elements of differentiation. As a matter of fact, research
has shown that innovative products that offer unique benefits versus the
competition have five times the success rate of products with fewer
elements of differentiation.

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Planning before Development:

This would seem almost intuitive, but unfortunately, many companies fail
to plan properly before developing a new product. Remember the old
phrase "If you fail to plan, you plan to fail." The "rule of thumb" in
successful new product development is to thoroughly define the product
before development gets underway. This means defining the target market,
the product concept, customer needs and wants, and product requirements.
Numbers don't lie. Research has demonstrated that new products in which
predevelopment activities were well-defined and executed had a success
rate of 75 percent versus just over 31 percent for products in which
those predevelopment activities were lacking.

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Technological Synergy and Quality:

Technological synergy

is when a new product is built on the firm's existing technological
resources. The bottom line is that new products that have a strong fit
between the project needs and the company's existing technological and
production resources are typically much more successful in the
marketplace. The further away the product strays from the company's
current technology, the less likely it is that the product will be
successful.

:::: {#note-00005 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Marketing Synergy and Quality:

Like technological synergy, marketing synergy is also an important
factor in new product success.

Marketing synergy

examines the fit between the needs of the new product development
project and the company's sales, advertising resources, customer service
capabilities, distribution, and marketing research. The closer the fit,
the more successful the product will likely be in the marketplace. As a
matter of fact, according to research, new products in which marketing
synergy existed were 2.3 times more likely to be successful than
products where marketing synergy was lacking.

:::: {#note-00006 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Market Attractiveness:

Market attractiveness

is a measure of potential value and considers factors like short- and
long-term profit, market growth rate, how much competition currently
exists in the market, the cost of entry into the market, and how much
the product satisfies the needs of customers in the target market.

:::: {#note-00007 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

:::: {#note-00008 .note}
::: title
Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC)
:::

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

If you were to ask people what they eat during the holiday season, you'd
probably get answers like turkey or ham. It's not likely that many of
them will say fried chicken (see [\#](#)). That's less than ideal for
Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC) because despite the fact that consumer
spending typically spikes during the last six weeks of the year, KFC's
sales typically falter.

Fortunately, savvy marketers at KFC came up with a new product designed
to remind consumers of KFC during the holiday season: the KFC 11 Herbs
and Spices Firelog that, when ignited, makes your house smell like fried
chicken. The idea behind this new product was twofold. First, a home's
fireplace usually plays an important role in the holiday season. Second
(and perhaps more importantly for KFC), hopefully the smell of fried
chicken makes people want to *eat* fried chicken!

Some of KFC's promotional efforts involved discussions on TV talk shows
and magazines. From these initiatives came 5,000 user-generated social
posts and the logs being sold out in three hours! How's that for a
successful product launch?
::::

# What Causes New Products to Fail? {#sect-00003}

We've just examined the factors that are favorable to the success of a
new product, but what about the reverse? Those failure rates we
mentioned in the previous section aren't to be taken lightly.

## Statistics on New Product Failure {#sect-00004}

So, you've made it through all the stages of new product development,
and you think your troubles are over. Think again! Just because
something is new, improved, or changed doesn't guarantee that consumers
will accept it or even hear about it. Every person reacts differently in
how they hear about innovation, how they understand it, and whether they
accept it.

Harvard Business School professor Clayton Christensen has been quoted as
suggesting that approximately 30,000 new products are launched each
year, and 95 percent of them fail. A study by the Product Development
and Management Association found that new product failure rates varied
among industries, ranging from 35 percent for health care products to 49
percent for consumer goods. Although those numbers are significantly
lower than that proposed by Professor Christensen, the message remains
the same: successful product launches shouldn't be taken for granted.

What causes new products to fail? The reasons are likely different from
one product to the next, but certain key factors appear to contribute
heavily to the failure (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

Let's review each of these factors more closely.

Failure to Understand Consumer Needs and Wants:

Let's illustrate this with a real-life scenario that some of you may
recall:

Google

Glass "smart glasses," which were like eyeglasses with smartphone
capabilities (i.e., wearable technology). When Google announced the
product in 2013, it issued a statement of principle reading, "We think
technology should work for you --- to be there when you need it and get
out of your way when you don't." However, sales were disappointing
despite the company's usual market hype, and it quickly became clear
that consumers didn't want or need the product. There were other devices
with longer battery life, faster processors, and better cameras, and
most had lower prices. Google discontinued the product's development in
2015.

:::: {#note-00012 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Targeting the Wrong Market:

It doesn't matter how incredible your technology is or how phenomenal
you think your product is. If you can't reach the right people in the
right market at the right time to buy your product, it's likely going to
fail. Even

Microsoft

fell prey to this mistake. The company decided to challenge the

Apple

iPod and launched Zune in 2006. The product failed, and Microsoft later
admitted that it was just chasing Apple, and its product gave consumers
little incentive to switch from the iPod to Zune.

:::: {#note-00013 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Lack of Product Point of Difference:

This could also be referred to as a lack of product uniqueness. If a new
product doesn't satisfy a unique need of consumers, it's unlikely to
dislodge existing brands that are available. The bottom line is that, to
succeed in the market, a product has to either satisfy a new function or
satisfy an existing function in new ways.

For example, Google launched Google+, its own social media site, in 2011
to compete with Facebook. However, Google+ was unable to distinguish
itself from Facebook, and the site never garnered the market share
Google anticipated. The company shut down personal accounts in 2019.

:::: {#note-00014 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

*Prolonged Development/Delayed Market Entry:* You've probably heard the
idiom that "time is money," and this is especially true in new product
development. If a company takes too long to launch a product, it often
spells doom for the product launch. By the time the product hits the
market, the economy may have taken a downturn, consumer needs may have
changed, or new competitors may have entered the market.

That's what happened to Amazon when it introduced its Fire Phone after
four years of development. CEO Jeff Bezos had said at the time, "Our job
is to build the greatest device we know how to build, and then customers
will choose. The other job we have is to be patient." Apparently, that
patience didn't pay off, because by the time the phone was introduced to
the market in 2014, Apple and Android already had several generations of
smartphones on the market. Amazon ceased production of the Fire Phone
just a year later and discontinued sales soon thereafter. Sometimes,
timing is everything!

Poor Pricing or Cost Structure:

Unfortunately, many new products suffer from a poor pricing or cost
structure. Perhaps the company designed the product with a number of
innovative features to try to bring "something new and different" to the
market, but the inclusion of all those features made the product more
costly to produce. You may be keeping your fingers crossed that the
market will be willing to pay more for that "new and improved" product,
but the reality is that this may not be the case.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00005}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00006}

:::: {#rf-030 .note}
::: title
:::

30\.

Joe Lazauskas, "How Storytelling Turned Dollar Shave Club into a Billion
Dollar-Brand,"

Marketing Insights

(blog), Convince & Convert, accessed January 18, 2022,
https://www.convinceandconvert.com/content-marketing/storytelling-turned-dollar-shave-club-into-a-billion-dollar-brand/.
::::

:::: {#rf-031 .note}
::: title
:::

31\.

Robert G. Cooper, "From Experience: The Invisible Success Factors in
Product Innovation,"

Journal of Product Innovation Management

16 (1999), 115--133,
https://dep.ufmg.br/old/disciplinas/epd836/artigo03.pdf.
::::

:::: {#rf-032 .note}
::: title
:::

32\.

Robert Cooper and Elko J. Kleinschmidt, "Success Factors for New‐Product
Development," in

Wiley International Encyclopedia of Marketing

, eds. Jagdish N. Sheth and Naresh K. Malhotra (John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
2010),
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/227992240_Success_Factors_for_New-Product_Development.
::::

:::: {#rf-033 .note}
::: title
:::

33\.

"What Makes Products Successful?" Magnetic, accessed May 6, 2022,
https://fluxx.uk.com/2015/11/what-makes-products-successful.
::::

:::: {#rf-034 .note}
::: title
:::

34\.

Robert G. Cooper and Elko J. Kleinschmidt,

New Products: The Key Factors in Success

(Chicago: American Marketing Association, 1990).
::::

:::: {#rf-035 .note}
::: title
:::

35\.

Cooper and Kleinschmidt.
::::

:::: {#rf-036 .note}
::: title
:::

36\.

Conor Bond, "5 Product Launch Examples That Are Worth Studying (+ Tips
for Success)," Crayon Competitive Intelligence Blog, July 16, 2021,
https://www.crayon.co/blog/5-examples-of-great-product-launches.
::::

:::: {#rf-037 .note}
::: title
:::

37\.

Bond.
::::

:::: {#rf-038 .note}
::: title
:::

38\.

Kurt Schroeder, "Why So Many New Products Fail (and It's Not the
Product)," The Business Journals, March 14, 2017,
https://www.bizjournals.com/bizjournals/how-to/marketing/2017/03/why-so-many-new-products-fail-and-it-s-not-the.html#:\~:text=A%20study%20by%20the%20Product,to%20be%20taken%20for%20granted.
::::

:::: {#rf-039 .note}
::: title
:::

39\.

Justin Burton Weidner, "How and Why Google Glass Failed," Investopedia,
August 8, 2021,
https://www.investopedia.com/articles/investing/052115/how-why-google-glass-failed.asp.
::::

:::: {#rf-040 .note}
::: title
:::

40\.

Jared Shaffer, "11 Reasons New Products Fail," UserVoice, accessed
January 8, 2022, https://www.uservoice.com/blog/why-products-fail.
::::

:::: {#rf-041 .note}
::: title
:::

41\.

Michael B. Sauter, Evan Comen, Thomas C. Frohlich, and Samuel Stebbins,
"When Product Launches Go Awry: 50 Worst Product Flops of all Time,"

USA Today

, July 11, 2018,
https://www.usatoday.com/story/money/2018/07/11/50-worst-product-flops-of-all-time/36734837/.
::::

:::: {#rf-042 .note}
::: title
:::

42\.

Victor Luckerson, "4 Reasons Amazon's Fire Phone Was a Flop,"

Time

, October 4, 2014, https://time.com/3536969/amazon-fire-phone-bust/.
::::

# 

market attractiveness

the measure of potential value; considers factors like short- and
long-term profit, market growth rate, how much competition currently
exists in the market, the cost of entry into the market, and how much
the product satisfies the needs of customers in the target market

marketing synergy

the fit between the needs of the new product development project and the
company's marketing capabilities

technological synergy

the extent to which a new product is built on the firm's existing
technological resources
