m00068

e79c6d59-e3ce-4722-bcf2-7971aedd0f04

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Describe the stages in the adoption process for new products.

Identify and define new product adopter categories.

# Stages in the Adoption Process {#sect-00002}

Consumers go through five stages in the process of adopting a new
product (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Let's look at each of these stages in the consumer adoption process
(often referred to as the "hierarchy of effects model") in some detail.

Stage 1:

Product Awareness

. The first stage in the consumer adoption process is simply creating
awareness that the product is available, so the company develops a
successful marketing strategy to make customers cognizant of the new
product. This strategy might include creating a strong presence for the
product in social media, for example. The goal here is to reach as many
customers as possible at a relatively low cost. Let's assume for a
minute that you're watching a football game on Saturday afternoon, and
you see a television commercial for a mouthwash that whitens your teeth
while you rinse. You're now aware of the product, thanks to that
commercial!

Stage 2:

Product Interest

. In this stage, consumers are aware of the product, and it has piqued
their interest. The company should guide consumers by providing easily
accessible information on the product, such as a website, blog posts,
tutorials, or instructional videos. Let's go back to our mouthwash
example. You're intrigued with the concept that a mouthwash can whiten
your teeth, so you call your brother who's a dentist to ask if he's
familiar with the product and what he has to say about it. That's
product interest.

Stage 3:

Product Evaluation

. Before they buy it, consumers will typically examine, compare, and
evaluate the product. They haven't purchased it yet, and they often look
to social media channels, such as online reviews and recommendations, to
see how other consumers feel about the product or service. Think about
it: How many times have you viewed customer reviews on Amazon prior to
purchasing a product? In our example of the mouthwash, you might do an
Internet search to read reviews of the product before you actually
purchase it. That's product evaluation.

Stage 4:

Product Trial

. This is the stage in the consumer adoption process where the consumer
actually tries the product out. It might be a free sample in a retail
store or a "100 percent money-back guarantee" trial purchase of an
online product. This is also the stage in which marketers are hoping
that the product will deliver on consumer expectations.

Stage 5:

Product Adoption

. When consumers enter this phase, they're ready to buy, whether it's
online or in a retail store. As a marketer, hopefully you've made the
acquisition and payment process as seamless as possible so that your
customers can easily obtain your product.

It should be noted that there are five characteristics of innovation,
and each affects the rate of adoption differently. This is also known as
the process of diffusion of innovation---the process through which new
products are adopted (or not) by customers. Let's take a look:

Relative Advantage

: How much is the new product "better than" what it replaces? This is,
of course, based entirely on a consumer's perception, but as a general
rule, the easier it is to recognize the advantages of using the product,
the more quickly it will be adopted.

Compatibility

: This is the level at which the innovation fits into a specific society
due to economic, lifestyle, and cultural reasons. For example, PCs were
very compatible with middle-class lifestyles, so the product was quickly
adopted. On the other hand, the diffusion of birth control in parts of
the world is not compatible with social mores due to religious beliefs
and cultural values.

Complexity

: How difficult is the new product for the adopter to understand and
use? If the difficulty level is too high, it is less likely that
adoption/diffusion will take place. Think about your own experiences:
Have you ever returned a product because it was too complicated to use?

Divisibility

: Divisibility is the ability to give the product a "test run" before
putting down your hard-earned cash. For example, in no small part due to
the COVID-19 pandemic, some online car sellers like

Carvana

and

Shift

, as well as some car dealerships, have adopted touchless test drives.
The car is brought to the shopper's home, it's wiped down with
disinfectant, and the consumer takes the car for a test drive alone
while the delivery person waits.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

*Communicability*: You may know your product is great, but you need to
be able to effectively communicate to your audience. Communicability is
the ability to effectively communicate the benefits and results of using
the product, and when those benefits and results are both observable and
describable to others. Let's imagine for a moment that you've purchased
an expensive Peloton bike to get in shape after the new year. Would you
continue to use it if you didn't see the desired results? Perhaps even
more importantly in terms of communicability, would you be willing to
share your results with others if those results weren't favorable?

It was first thought that diffusion was a one-step process: from mass
media (i.e., advertising) to the individual. Marketers now recognize
that it is a two-step process, and the second step is personal
influence---that is, communication between individuals in which
individuals can affect the purchasing decision of others because of
their authority, knowledge, or position. For example, Kylie Jenner is a
powerful social media influencer with over 250 million followers on
Instagram.

# New Product Adopter Categories {#sect-00003}

Consumers adopt new products at their own speed. Some want to have the
"latest and the greatest" as soon as it is available. If you doubt that,
just look at the lines around any Apple store on the day of a new
product release. Others tend to wait a while before buying. Scholar and
professor of sociology at The Ohio State University Everett Rogers is
credited with introducing the diffusion of innovation theory in 1962, in
which he explained how a product or idea gains momentum and spreads
through a population or society. In his theory, he identified five
adopter categories (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

Let's look at each of these categories in a little more depth.

Innovators

: Innovators are the risk-takers in the market. As a general rule, they
have higher-than-average income and are typically well-educated. They
enjoy the "rush" of taking risk but are also willing to accept the
consequences of failure. It's the innovators who buy new products as
soon as they hit the market.

Early Adopters

: Early adopters are actually the best target market for new
innovations. These people tend to be well-educated "opinion leaders"
with neighbors and friends, and their product advice is generally
accepted more readily than product advice provided by innovators.

Early Majority

: The early majority typically look to the innovators and early adopters
to determine if the new product meets expectations because they don't
want to take the risk of being the first to adopt the new product, but
they do accept innovation before the "average person." This group of
consumers is typically above average in terms of education and income
but also tend to be "followers" in their social group.

Late Majority

: Consumers in the late majority category are typically slow to catch on
to the popularity of new services, products, ideas, or solutions. About
34 percent of the population will buy a new product only after about
half of the population does. They're not interested in the "bells and
whistles" (i.e., functionality and benefits) of the "latest model" and
want simple, cost-effective products that focus on specific uses. As a
general rule, their income and education are limited, and they're
typically unwilling to take a chance with a new product unless the
majority of consumers has already adopted the innovation.

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Laggards

: Laggards are more in tune with the past than the future, and they're
leery of new ideas. By the time they adopt a product, there's probably
already a new version or innovation taking its place.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00004}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00005}

:::: {#rf-043 .note}
::: title
:::

43\.

Philip Reed, "The New World of Car-Buying: Remote Negotiation, Home
Delivery and No-Touch Test Drives," MarketWatch, April 14, 2020,
https://www.marketwatch.com/story/the-new-world-of-car-buying-remote-negotiation-home-delivery-and-no-touch-test-drives-2020-04-14.
::::

:::: {#rf-044 .note}
::: title
:::

44\.

"9 of the biggest social media influencers on Instagram," Digital
Marketing Institute, September 19, 2021,
https://digitalmarketinginstitute.com/blog/9-of-the-biggest-social-media-influencers-on-instagram#:\~:text=A%20social%20media%20influencer%20is,company\'s%20arsenal%20when%20done%20right.
::::

:::: {#rf-045 .note}
::: title
:::

45\.

"Diffusion of Innovation," Corporate Finance Institute, April 24, 2021,
https://corporatefinanceinstitute.com/resources/knowledge/other/diffusion-of-innovation/.
::::

:::: {#rf-046 .note}
::: title
:::

46\.

Charlie Wells, "Forget Early Adopters: These People Are Happy to Be
Late,"

The Wall Street Journal

, January 26, 2016,
https://www.wsj.com/articles/forget-early-adopters-these-people-are-happy-to-be-late-1453827437.
::::

# 

communicability

the ability to communicate to the audience the benefits of using a
particular product or service

consumer adoption process

stages consumers go through in adopting a new product

diffusion of innovation

theory about how products gain momentum and spread through a population
or society

divisibility

the ability of a consumer to give a product a "test run" before
purchasing it

early adopters

consumers who are willing to try new products typically before others
but not as early as innovators

early majority

consumers who are initially reluctant to risk trying a new product but
accept innovation

innovators

consumers who are the first to take a risk and buy new products as soon
as they are available

laggards

consumers who are skeptical of new ideas and are reluctant to try new
products

late majority

consumers who are slow to catch on to the popularity of new services,
products, ideas, or solutions

personal influence

communication between individuals in which individuals can affect the
purchasing decision of others because of their authority, knowledge, or
position

product adoption

the fifth stage in the consumer adoption process, also known as user
adoption, in which people learn about a product and start using its
features

product awareness

the first stage in the consumer adoption process, in which a company
creates awareness that the product is available

product evaluation

the third stage in the consumer adoption process, in which consumers
examine, compare, and evaluate the product prior to purchase

product interest

stage in the consumer adoption process in which the product has piqued
the consumer's interest

product trial

the fourth stage in the consumer adoption process, in which the consumer
tries the product out
