m00069

32a7c6c9-0d33-41a6-8232-30895c359fcb

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Discuss violations of patents, trademarks, and/or copyrights.

Describe ways to exercise due care in product development.

# Violations of Patents, Trademarks, and/or Copyrights {#sect-00002}

Before we proceed with a discussion of the areas of concern with respect
to patents, trademarks, and copyrights in new product development, it
would probably be helpful to have some definitions. Patents secure the
right to exclude others from making, using, or offering for sale the
invention you've developed. As a general rule, US patents last 20 years
from when the application is filed with the US Patent Office. Copyrights
are original works of authorship that include software, songs,
television shows, and motion pictures. Trademarks are words or symbols
legally registered or established by use as representing a company or
product. Collectively, these terms are referred to as intellectual
property (IP).

You may think that intellectual property infringements are uncommon or,
at least, limited to new product development by smaller companies, but
nothing could be further from the truth. Patent lawsuits and
ever-increasing scrutiny for anticompetitive behavior have cost "Big
Tech" companies like Apple, Microsoft, and Google hundreds of millions
of dollars.

For example, in March 2021, a jury ruled against Apple for patent
infringement and ordered it to pay over \$300 million to Personalized
Media Communications LLC. That same year, a judge ruled that Google had
infringed on five patents owned by Sonos, and if the ruling is upheld,
it may result in the ban of imports of products like Google Home and
Pixel smartphones.

Intellectual property infringement can have serious consequences in
terms of both monetary fines and, of course, the reputation of the
company. Penalties can include civil damages, lost profits, injunctions,
payment of the other damaged party's attorneys' fees, and even felony
charges with prison time.

# Methods of Exercising Due Care During Product Development {#sect-00003}

Intellectual property rights add immense value to a company's assets.
Imagine having a product team invest time, energy, and money developing
and then launching a new product only to discover that the company's
intellectual property rights aren't protected or---worse yet---that the
product team has infringed on another company's intellectual property
rights. That's why it's important in the product development stage to do
three things:

Conduct a Trademark Search:

It's critical to know whether anyone else is already using the mark

before

time and resources are invested into developing a name and market
recognition. For example,

Takeda Pharmaceuticals

was required to change the name of its antidepressant drug Brintellix to
Trintellix because of consumer confusion between Brintellix and an
anti-blood-clotting drug named Brilinta.

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

File a Trademark Application:

Filing a trademark application provides the company with a bona fide
statement of intention to use the mark within six months of the
application.

Conduct a Patent Search:

If the product relates to a technological or scientific invention, the
company should also conduct a patent search. As noted above, the patent
excludes others from making, using, or selling a claimed invention for
20 years.

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Another issue that you may hear a lot about is the control or lack of
control users have over their personal data. Companies that collect
personal data have to carefully (and ethically) consider what
information is embedded in systems design, how much data is really
needed from users, where that data will be stored, and when and how it
will be disposed of after use.

:::: {#note-00006 .note}
::: title
Meta
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Meta (formerly Facebook) has come under fire for several reasons
recently, including a scandal that involved a whistleblower (see
[\#](#)). This person revealed that the tech giant "chooses profits over
safety" when they released internal research and documents and testified
before the United States Senate.

However, the company took steps to ensure ethics in its new product
development by hiring Zvika Krieger to its Responsible Innovation Team
(RIT). Although the team had been in existence for some time, it's
growing in size with the emergence of new ethical issues. Krieger's role
focused on ethical issues in both the engineering and the design
processes. For example, the RIT was involved in the decision to disallow
filtering dating app results by race.

The RIT focused on the design and development stage of product
development with the specific role of identifying ethical issues.
Krieger departed Meta, and the RIT was dissolved in 2022; most members
moved into other areas of the company, where they may be able to
influence decisions more directly.
::::

#  {#sect-00004}

In this chapter we discussed the different forms of innovation as
applied to new product development. The rewards of this development can
include means to target a new market, to increase market share, and to
increase revenue streams. Included in the risks are financial and
technical feasibility and a lack of differentiation from existing
products. There are seven stages to developing new products that include
idea generation, idea screening and evaluation, concept development and
testing, marketing strategy development, business analysis, product
development, and test-marketing. The stages are followed by
commercialization and evaluation of results.

Metrics are used to evaluate such things as R&D spending as a percentage
of sales, return on investment (ROI), the percentage of sales due to the
new product release, and other key concepts.

New products succeed when there is synergy and quality of technology and
marketing and when the product delivers benefits to users. By contrast,
failure can be due to targeting the wrong market and misunderstanding
consumer needs/wants. The adoption process was discussed and includes
different categories of consumers.

#  {#sect-00006}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00005}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00007}

Review this [Ascent article by Aaron Weber](#) and pay attention to his
explanation of the 5 Ps for building your personal brand. Write two
paragraphs on what you feel your personal brand is today. Is it what you
want it to be? Interview three colleagues, classmates, or family members
and ask them to describe how they see your brand. Add a paragraph to
your write-up describing their assessment.

Add another paragraph discussing your brand assessment compared to those
you interviewed. Is it the same or different? Include changes you would
like to make and the impact it would have on your personal brand.

#  {#sect-00008}

Using an online networking platform---for example, LinkedIn---network
and connect with someone in product development. Explain that you have a
college project and that you'd like to interview them. There are
hundreds of product development professionals, and you will quickly find
that professionals in this field love to talk about their products and
ideas.

Use the following questions as a guide to dig deeper into their job
responsibilities.

Could you please outline your career and how you got started on this
path?

Please outline for me your current job responsibilities.

Do you specialize in a particular product concept (food, fashion, etc.)?

How do you interact with and support your team or clients in this role?

What product have you worked on that you are most proud of or excited
about?

What product did you work on that failed? What did you learn in that
process?

What advice can you offer me if I choose to pursue product development
as my career path?

As always, follow up with any questions that you have, being respectful
of their time, and be sure to thank them for their information and help!

#  {#sect-00009}

## Maintaining a Competitive Edge with New Offerings---Ember {#sect-00010}

Every morning, millions of Americans wake up and prepare a cup of
coffee. But as they sit down to drink it, the deluge of interruptions
begins. Once the interruptions begin, that delicious dark roast often
goes cold. Within the United States there are approximately 150 million
coffee drinkers. Throughout the day, people pour a cup of coffee, a cup
of tea, or a variety of other hot drinks, only to be distracted and come
back to a cold beverage. Many hot beverage drinkers have transitioned to
the insulated travel mug where the drink stays hot for a while, but it
too eventually gets cold.

Back in 2009, Clay Alexander was eating his breakfast. By the time he
took his last bite, his scrambled eggs were cold. Alexander began
experimenting with dinner plates that could stay hot and keep food at
the same temperature throughout the meal. Then, one day as he was
drinking coffee, he realized that using the same the technology with a
coffee mug would be a transformative experience. In playing with the
technology, he developed the Ember mug. (Watch this video for more
information on the Ember mug development story.)

[Clay Alexander: Ember\'s Founder Story](#)

Alexander's first version of the Ember mug looked like something from
*Weird Science*. The prototype mug was not sleek or stylish and
definitely was not easy to clean. But as he carried his early version of
the Ember mug to work and around town, curious commuters began to ask
questions. Alexander was raising awareness and piquing the interest of
potential new consumers. Through his interactions, he knew that there
was definitely interest in a product that could keep beverages at a
constant temperature for a long period of time.

This new innovation was a juncture of cutting-edge digital technology
and the low-tech coffee mug. Using technology to warm the cup and keep a
hot beverage at a constant temperature, Ember transformed the common
mug. The Ember mug was able to keep hot beverages at a constant
temperature for hours.

Creating the new product required hours of development. Building the
product meant developing, testing, creating more prototypes, more
testing, and running a business analysis. The new product was great.
There was nothing like it on the market. But would customers buy it? A
new entrant in the market often comes with a high price tag. All the
hours, months, and years of development are coupled with the high cost
of creating brand awareness.

The biggest question with the Ember mug was, How would the customer
respond? Innovators are the first to purchase new market entry products,
and they typically look for and buy new products before the rest of the
market. And for this product, that market would probably include the
coffee connoisseur and die-hard coffee drinkers. As with any new
product, the biggest obstacle would be creating awareness and connecting
with consumers about the benefits of the Ember mug.

Alexander knew that consumers were already attached to their
smartphones, so he incorporated the Ember technology into something they
already used. Consumers could control the temperature of their Ember mug
beverages through the Ember app on their smart phones. With dozens of
settings to create and keep the perfect temperature, Ember technology
was easy and very customizable.

Getting the product to market meant getting it right and easily
educating the consumer on the benefits of the Ember mug. The Ember mug
incorporates smart LEDs to indicate when the mug has the beverage at the
perfect temperature. Using a built-in battery, the Ember mug can work
all day if placed on its charging coaster or upward of two hours without
the coaster after being fully charged. The Ember mug also comes with
auto-sleep technology to know when to turn off as well as built-in
temperature controls for the variable preferences of consumers.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

Initially the Ember was only available for sale on the company's
website; however, as brand awareness increased and consumer demand
picked up, the Ember could be purchased through both online and in-store
retailers. The mug can now be purchased at Amazon, Best Buy, Costco,
Starbucks, and several other locations.

Ember has been featured in leading publications such as *Forbes*, *Fast
Company*, and *People* as well as broadcast and digital media including
*Today*. With many positive reviews, excellent public relations, and
organic word of mouth from customers, the Ember mug saw positive growth.
Since the introduction of the original 10-ounce mug, Ember added a
14-ounce version as well as a travel mug and plenty of added charging
options.

## Case Questions {#sect-00011}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00012}

:::: {#rf-047 .note}
::: title
:::

47\.

Hannah Towey, "Big Tech Giants Apple and Google Are Losing Legal Battles
Over Patents Amid a Recent Litigation Surge, Risking Hundreds of
Millions in Potential Costs,"

Business Insider

, August 16, 2021,
https://www.businessinsider.com/big-tech-apple-google-optis-sonos-legal-battles-over-patents-2021-8.
::::

:::: {#rf-048 .note}
::: title
:::

48\.

Adam Uzialko, "Tips to Avoid Intellectual Property Infringement,"

Business News Daily

, June 29, 2022,
https://www.businessnewsdaily.com/6043-intellectual-property-tips.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-049 .note}
::: title
:::

49\.

"Brintellix (Vortioxetine) Renamed Trintellix (Vortioxetine) in U.S. to
Avoid Name Confusion," Takeda, May 16, 2016, from
https://www.takeda.com/newsroom/newsreleases/2016/brintellix-vortioxetine-renamed-trintellix-vortioxetine-in-u.s.-to-avoid-name-confusion/.
::::

:::: {#rf-050 .note}
::: title
:::

50\.

Sanford E. Warren Jr., "Protect Assets and Limit Liability: Three Things
to Consider When Launching a New Product,"

IRMI Update

, International Risk Management Institute Inc., April 2011,
https://www.irmi.com/articles/expert-commentary/three-things-to-consider-when-launching-a-new-product.
::::

:::: {#rf-051 .note}
::: title
:::

51\.

Michael Huth, "Rethinking Product Development and Usage to Make a Tech
Business Ethical," Nasdaq, February 10, 2021,
https://www.nasdaq.com/articles/rethinking-product-development-and-usage-to-make-a-tech-business-ethical-2021-02-10.
::::

:::: {#rf-052 .note}
::: title
:::

52\.

Brian McHugh, "Facebook Under Fire as Whistleblower Reveals Harmful
Practices," Marist Circle, October 25, 2021,
https://www.maristcircle.com/citynational-news/2021/10/25/facebook-whistleblower-reveals-harmful-practices.
::::

:::: {#rf-054 .note}
::: title
:::

54\.

"Coffee Statistics 2022," E-Imports, accessed July 24, 2022,
https://www.e-importz.com/coffee-statistics.php
::::

:::: {#rf-055 .note}
::: title
:::

55\.

"Find an Ember Retailer Near You," Ember, accessed July 24, 2022,
https://ember.com/pages/retailers
::::

# 

copyrights

original works of authorship that include software, songs, television
shows, and motion pictures

intellectual property

collective term used to describe patents, copyrights, and trademarks

patents

the right to exclude others from making, using, or offering for sale an
invention

trademarks

words or symbols legally registered or established by use as
representing a company or product
