m00109

48bd25af-db89-454c-84fd-8b1359f6d179

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Have you ever had a great idea for a new food product? If so, do you
have any idea where you would sell it to reach your target customers?
Unlike traditional grocery retailers, Whole Foods specializes in selling
high-quality natural and organic foods. Getting the green light to sell
through its stores requires manufacturers to follow strict quality
standards, including adherence to Whole Foods' banned ingredient list.

Founders Dave Anderson and Bill Glaser of Outstanding Foods and maker of
PigOut, a vegan, bacon-flavored chip snack, recognized that in order to
reach vegans and nonvegans with a plant-based, bacon-flavored chip, they
need to retail at outlets that would attract such consumers.

After testing their product, they opted for a nationwide launch and
distribution strategy. Using a broker network, they selected
distribution channels that aligned with both natural and mainstream
grocery stores. This strategy would help secure the national target
market coverage they were looking for. The product strategy of natural
ingredients gave Outstanding Foods the green light it needed to meet
Whole Foods' strict food standards. Through their partnership, Whole
Foods and Outstanding Foods are able to create and deliver value to
their vegan customer base who appreciate access to food products that
are tasty and bring delight.

# Endnotes {#sect-00001}

:::: {#rf-001 .note}
::: title
:::

1\.

"Outstanding Foods: Taking This Little Pig-Free Bacon Chip to Market,"
BeyondBrands, accessed March 27, 2022,
https://www.beyondbrands.org/work/outstandingfoods.
::::
