m00110

e2be2b11-13b5-4c01-b9ba-721e3029f5c1

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Describe the use of marketing channels.

Identify the different types of marketing channels.

Discuss how marketing intermediaries add value to products.

# What Are Marketing Channels? {#sect-00002}

In addition to identifying ways to create value for consumers, marketers
must also decide how to distribute market offerings. In this section,
you'll explore the important role that marketing channels play in
delivering value to targeted customers.

A marketing channel is a system of people, organizations, and activities
that work together to make goods and services available to consumers to
purchase. Along the marketing channel, ownership of these goods and
services is transferred from one channel member to the next. The goal is
to create and deliver value to the final consumer by distributing these
goods and services. The final consumer is the end user of a good or
service. It includes grocery store shoppers, movie stream viewers, app
users, vacation-takers, and many more.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
Distribution
:::

To learn more about how the distribution of products works and the
decisions marketers must consider when choosing the right marketing
channel, watch the Channels of Distribution in Marketing: 8 Distribution
Channels to Consider video.

[Channels of Distribution in Marketing: 8 Distribution Channels to
Consider](#)
::::

## Marketing Channels (Distribution Channels) Defined {#sect-00003}

It's not enough for companies to create, price, and promote products and
services that deliver value. A company must also decide where and how
consumers can access and purchase the company's market offering. Market
offerings can include tangible goods, services, experiences, digital
products, ideas, and information. All market offerings require a
marketing or distribution channel to reach consumers.

Think of a channel like a stream or a river that carries a market
offering to the consumer. Distribution describes how a company makes its
market offering accessible for purchase. Local companies that sell to a
smaller, more geographically concentrated set of consumers have a more
simplified marketing or distribution channel compared to global
companies.

The film industry provides a great example of the distribution decisions
that marketers must make. Before a production company releases a new
movie, it must decide which channels are best for distributing the movie
to consumers. In today's market, movie producers have a slew of
distribution options, including Netflix, HBOMax, and YouTube, to name a
few. They also have the option of distributing through traditional movie
theaters, such as AMC or Regal. Regardless of the marketing channel they
pursue, their goal is to distribute their movie to the right customers
at the right place and at the right time. Production companies will
choose the marketing channel that is most efficient at helping them
achieve this goal.

## Marketing Channels for Consumer Products {#sect-00004}

Companies that use intermediaries to deliver value to consumers have a
variety of marketing channel options. There are four major types of
intermediaries: agents or brokers, distributors, wholesalers, and
retailers (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

An agent or broker is someone who acts as an extension to the
manufacturer. While they never take possession of the product or service
they represent, they earn a commission or collect a fee for facilitating
the transaction between the customer and the manufacturer. Auto
insurance agents, for example, may sell Geico or Allstate auto insurance
policies to consumers. The agent serves as a representative who answers
questions, gathers information, and provides a quote on behalf of the
insurance company.

A distributor takes ownership of the product and tends to align itself
closely with a manufacturer. For example, Coca-Cola uses distributors
who contract to distribute only Coca-Cola products, not PepsiCo
products.

Wholesalers are similar to distributors in that they take ownership of
products; however, they buy a variety of products in large quantities
and bulk-break for the purpose of distributing an assortment of products
to retailers in a quantity aimed at meeting the needs of end users or
consumers. Let's examine how the different types of intermediaries
depend on one another. AstraZeneca manufactures prescription medications
that are made available to consumers by way of pharmacies such as CVS
and Walgreens. Pharmacies are retailers in the marketing channel because
they sell a wide variety of consumer products, from toothpaste to milk
to medications.

Before AstraZeneca's medications reach retail pharmacies, they are
purchased in bulk by wholesalers who partner directly with AstraZeneca.
Wholesalers are an integral part of the marketing channel because they
package and handle medications and manage the logistics of delivery to
retail pharmacies. This creates value for the customer in that the right
quantity of medications arrives at retail pharmacies safely and in good
condition.

The fourth type of intermediary is the retailer. Retailers also take
ownership of the product, and their sole focus is on reaching the end
user or customer directly. They purchase a wide variety of products in
smaller amounts that meet the wants and needs of consumers. Retailers
include companies like Rite Aid, Walmart, Target, and Hallmark.

# Intermediary Functions {#sect-00005}

The intermediaries' role is critical, and they perform a variety of
functions (as shown in [\#](#)) that create value for other members in
the marketing channel.

  Intermediary Functions
  ---------------------------------------------------------------
  Transactional: Buying, selling, and temporary risk-bearing
  Logistical: Handling, packing, inventorying, and transporting
  Facilitating: Financing and information sharing

  : Intermediary Functions {#table-00001}

Let's examine the three functions: transactional, logistical, and
facilitating.

## Transactional Functions {#sect-00006}

Intermediaries perform a variety of transactional functions that improve
the efficiency of the channel. Transactional functions involve the
buying, selling, and risk-bearing that accompany the movement of
products along the marketing channel. Companies share the risk of
ownership by temporarily possessing products before selling them to
another channel member.

Imagine if a small bakery made the best oatmeal raisin cookies and
decided to distribute them to consumers using local restaurants in the
city. The bakery sells to the restaurant, who then sells to the
customer. Temporary risk-sharing, in this scenario, means that at first
the bakery assumes the risk in the making, storing, and transporting of
the cookies, but that risk transfers to the restaurant once the
restaurant buys the cookies. The restaurant then assumes ownership and
responsibility for selling the cookies, which may involve placing them
someplace customers can see them.

The transactional functions of buying, selling, and risk-bearing help
add value in the marketing channel because the system allows for channel
members to work together to move a product offering to consumers in an
efficient and effective way.

## Logistical Functions {#sect-00007}

In addition to transactional functions, intermediaries also perform
logistical functions, which involve handling, packing, inventorying,
transporting, warehousing, and ensuring the security of products as they
make their way to the customer. In the earlier bakery example, the
bakery must ensure the cookies are fresh and tasty in order to continue
supplying restaurants with a product that consumers desire. In order to
ensure that cookies meet the wants and needs of customers, both the
bakery and the restaurant must ensure the product is handled safely in
the marketing channel. That might mean selecting a trucking company that
secures the cookies during transport to restaurants as well as packaging
them so that freshness is sealed and quality is maintained.

## Facilitating Functions {#sect-00008}

In addition to transactional and logistical functions, intermediaries
also help in the facilitation of the purchase of products and services.
Facilitating functions involve activities such as financing and sharing
information with members of the marketing channel. Intermediaries may
provide financing to one another and to the end user to help move the
product along the channel. Financing involves one channel member
allowing another channel member to pay over time.

In the bakery example, pretend that the restaurant purchases \$12,000 in
cookies each year. Instead of the bakery requiring the restaurant to pay
for the order in full at the beginning of each year, it allows the
restaurant to pay \$1,000 a month over a 12-month period. This benefits
the restaurant in that a large amount of capital isn't tied up in its
cookie order payment but instead is spread out over time. While some
companies require payment in full, others permit payment installments
over time. The terms of payment are explicitly stated at the start of
the buying and selling relationship between companies.

Intermediaries also share information that can be used to improve
marketing decisions. Intermediaries often share key data such as
consumer feedback on a product or service, the shopping behavior
surrounding that product or service, and historical purchase trends. The
facilitating functions that intermediaries perform ultimately help
marketing channel members make better distribution decisions and, in
some cases, financially support the movement of these products and
services in the name of delivering value to customers.

# How Intermediaries Add Value to Customers {#sect-00009}

Intermediaries play a critical role in adding value to customers. They
specialize in aspects of distribution that manufacturers don't wish to
specialize in. They create efficiencies in the marketing channel by
reducing transactions, sharing important information among partners, and
matching the right quantity of the right product to customer demand.
While manufacturers focus on creating value for customers,
intermediaries focus on delivering that value.

Dove manufactures millions of units of body wash, bar soap, dry spray
antiperspirant, and hair products. In turn, it sells large quantities of
these products to wholesalers, who after buying in bulk, break these
large quantities down into smaller assortments that are then sold to
retailers. This allows consumers to buy a variety of products in smaller
amounts. They can visit a Target, a CVS, or the Amazon website and
purchase three bars of soap, one bottle of shampoo, and one bottle of
conditioner.

Without intermediaries, customers would need to buy directly from every
manufacturer producing the desired product. Imagine grocery shopping
without intermediaries. Instead of shopping at one or two grocery
retailers for bread, milk, cereal, fruit, and ice cream, shoppers would
need to buy from individual manufacturers, making shopping extremely
time consuming and difficult.

Intermediaries add value by reducing the number of transactions between
companies and customers. As illustrated in [\#](#), there are nine
transactions without intermediaries and five transactions with the use
of intermediaries. Consider the inefficiencies if companies had to
directly transact with individual consumers.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

## Providing Needed Information about Products and Services {#sect-00010}

Intermediaries share pertinent information about the products and
services that move through the distribution channel. More specifically,
intermediaries gather, analyze, and communicate information to other
distribution partners to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the
channel. This flow ultimately helps marketers plan and optimize the
distribution channel so that consumers get the right products and
services at the right place and at the right time.

## Adjusting for Discrepancy of Quantity {#sect-00011}

As intermediaries move products and services from manufacturers to
consumers, they offer the valuable service of accumulating and
bulk-breaking. Bulk-breaking is when an intermediary takes a large
quantity of a manufacturer's product and breaks it down into smaller
units to be distributed to retailers based on the consumer demand.
Consumers desire to purchase in smaller quantities from retailers.
Wholesalers buy in bulk from producers and break the bulk into the right
size quantity for retailers, who ultimately meet the needs of consumers
who want an assortment of products in small quantities.

Accumulating relates to intermediaries buying in bulk from different
manufacturers. When buying in bulk, it is beneficial to the
manufacturers because the risk is passed from manufacturers to
intermediaries. The United States produces hundreds of millions of
bushels of apples, oranges, and peaches each year. These types of
produce require different types of climates and care and are therefore
grown in different states across the country. Wholesalers play a
critical role in buying an assortment of this product in bulk from these
producers and ensure that they are sold to retailers in the right
quantity to meet the needs of consumers.

Together these activities allow intermediaries to offer retailers the
right number of products to offer consumers, based on demand.

## Adjusting for Discrepancy of Assortment {#sect-00012}

Intermediaries also add value by adjusting for the discrepancies of
assortment between the manufacturer and the consumer. Discrepancy of
assortment is the difference between the variety of products that a
manufacturer produces and the variety that consumers want to purchase.
Adjusting for discrepancy of assortment occurs when an intermediary buys
from manufacturers, then regroups products into different assortments
based on what consumers are demanding from retailers.

While manufacturers generally produce large quantities of one or a few
types of products, consumers demand small quantities of an assortment of
products. For example, when visiting the grocery store, consumers demand
an array of different products in small quantities. Depending on the
size of their household, consumers are generally shopping to meet the
needs of one or a few people; therefore, they value the ability to buy a
variety of products in smaller quantities. Intermediaries mitigate these
differences by matching supply assortment to demand assortment.

## Providing Credit to Customers {#sect-00013}

Intermediaries also provide credit to customers. Consumers can hardly
check out at a cash register without being asked if they would like to
sign up for a credit card. By extending credit to customers, retailers
from Dick's Sporting Goods to furniture retailer Wayfair give customers
the chance to spend now and pay over a period of time with interest.

While providing credit to customers is often accompanied by special
email offers and direct mail coupon codes, the corresponding interest
rates are often high. Nevertheless, providing credit to customers can
create brand loyalty and provide retailers with insight into consumer
purchases.

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
Distribution Management
:::

Distribution managers determine when, where, and how much of a product
is distributed. Learn more about the job role and what it entails in
this video.

[What is Distribution Management?](#)

[Michigan State University provides insightful information](#) on this
career, including a sample job description, roles and responsibilities,
salary, education, and training. When looking at your skill development
and what you may need in order to obtain a job, check out ZipRecruiter's
website. It indicates that while there are several skills needed in this
job role, compliance and customer service are the most common. [Read
more about the needed skills](#) on the Zip Recruiter website.
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00014}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00015}

:::: {#rf-002 .note}
::: title
:::

2\.

"Apples," Agricultural Marketing Resource Center, Iowa State University,
revised September 2021,
https://www.agmrc.org/commodities-products/fruits/apples.
::::

:::: {#rf-003 .note}
::: title
:::

3\.

Latoya Irby, "How Store Credit Cards Are Different from Regular Credit
Cards," The Balance, Dotdash Meredith, updated November 21, 2020,
https://www.thebalance.com/store-credit-cards-are-different-from-credit-cards-960146.
::::

# 

accumulating

relates to intermediaries buying in bulk from different manufacturers

adjusting for discrepancy of assortment

occurs when an intermediary buys from manufacturers, then regroups
products into different assortments based on what consumers are
demanding from retailers

agent

a type of intermediary who acts as an extension to the manufacturer

bulk-breaking

occurs when an intermediary takes a large bundling of a manufacturer's
product and breaks it down into single units to be distributed to
retailers based on the retailer's order

distribution

the process of making products and services available and accessible to
consumers to purchase

distributor

a type of intermediary that takes ownership of the product and tends to
align itself closely with a manufacturer

facilitating functions

activities such as financing and information sharing in the marketing
channel

final consumer

the end user of a good or service

logistical functions

the handling, packing, inventorying, transporting, warehousing, and
ensuring the security of products as they make their way to the customer

marketing channel

system of people, organizations, and activities that work together to
make goods and services available to consumers for use

retailer

a type of intermediary where retailers take ownership of the product and
their sole focus is on reaching the end user or customer directly

transactional functions

buying, selling, and risk-bearing that goes along with the movement of
products along the marketing channel

wholesaler

similar to distributors in that they take ownership of products; buys
products in large quantities for the purpose of distributing an
assortment of products to retailers
