m00111

79623763-6a42-4e3a-9bf6-7d4ea56304a3

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify the types of marketing channels that exist for consumer
products.

Describe the types of marketing channels that exist for
business/industrial products.

Discuss vertical, horizontal, multichannel, and omnichannel marketing
systems.

# Types of Marketing Channels {#sect-00002}

When determining the most effective and efficient way to reach consumers
with products, companies have two options. Companies can either sell and
distribute their products directly to consumers, known as a direct
channel, or they can partner with intermediaries who can assist with the
distribution, known as an indirect channel.

## Direct Channel: From Producer to Consumer {#sect-00003}

In some cases, manufacturers decide that a direct marketing channel
makes sense. A direct marketing channel does not use intermediaries but
rather involves the manufacturer distributing its market offering
directly to consumers. When consumers purchase pizza from their locally
owned and operated pizza shop, the distribution of that pizza passes
from the restaurant directly to the consumer. There are no
intermediaries between the pizza shop and the customer.

## Indirect Channels: From Producer to Intermediary to Consumer {#sect-00004}

An indirect channel involves the utilization of one or more
intermediaries to distribute a market offering to consumers. Continuing
with our pizza shop example, if a local pizza shop offered pizza that
was delicious enough to package, freeze, and sell through local grocery
stores in the frozen food aisle, that pizza shop would be adding an
indirect channel of distribution.

In some cases, manufacturers or producers sell to retailers without the
use of wholesalers or distributors, called the producer to retailer to
consumer channel. A local Ace Hardware, for example, sells fishing lures
made by the local scout troop. The troop purchases the supplies
necessary to make the lures then sells them to Ace Hardware, which sells
them to customers.

With producer to wholesaler to retailer to consumer---a more complex
marketing channel---multiple types of intermediaries are needed. Procter
& Gamble, the maker of Crest, Gillette, and Pampers, relies on an
intricate network of intermediaries composed of wholesalers and
retailers that work interdependently to ensure the right mix and
quantity of products reach consumers. Consider all the places a consumer
can purchase Procter & Gamble products all over the world.

For some industries, the distribution network is complex, and agents
represent the manufacturer in marketing channel negotiations. Health
insurance agents, for example, represent major insurance carriers such
as Aetna and Blue Cross by providing consumers with information about
health plans in their state. In these situations, the agent does not
take ownership of the product like other intermediaries but rather is
paid a fee by the insurance carrier.

For companies with a diverse product category that spans the globe,
indirect channels of distribution make the most sense. Procter & Gamble
sells hundreds of different products across many product categories
worldwide. Indirect channels are necessary in such cases. [\#](#)
illustrates the difference between a direct and indirect channel of
distribution for consumer products.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# Marketing Channels for Business/Industrial Products {#sect-00005}

The business-to-business (B2B) market is comprised of companies who buy
from and sell to other companies. In the B2B space, businesses are not
distributing to final consumers but rather to other businesses.
Companies in the B2B market buy, sell, and use materials, resources, and
technology from one another to create products, where a business is the
final consumer or destination.

Within this market, there are agents, brokers, distributors, and
wholesalers who specialize in moving industrial products along the
marketing channel to the final business consumer. [\#](#) illustrates an
example of a distribution channel for business products.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

## Direct Channel: From Producer to Business/Industrial User {#sect-00006}

Much like the business-to-consumer (B2C) space, when a company sells
products or services directly to a final consumer or end user, the B2B
marketing channel can be direct without the use of intermediaries. The
direct channel is typically used when the nature of the product is
complex, is expensive, or requires intensive resources to move the
product from the manufacturer to the business customer. Airplane
manufacturers like Boeing and Airbus produce and sell aircraft directly
to airlines like Delta Air Lines and American Airlines, who then offer
flights to consumers. Given the expense and complexity of distributing
airplanes, the direct channel makes the most sense.

## Indirect Channels: From Producer to Intermediaries to Business/Industrial User {#sect-00007}

Industries often rely on the expertise of intermediaries to reach
business users with their products and services. The advantages of the
indirect channel in the business-to-business (B2B) space are similar to
those in the business-to-consumer (B2C) space. For some industries,
intermediaries perform important functions along the business marketing
channel that they themselves are not experts in. Let's explore the
different indirect marketing channels.

With producer to industrial distributor to business/industrial user
channels, car manufacturers like Toyota and Honda rely on tens of
thousands of different parts, which are manufactured by parts producers.
Producers are companies that supply the raw materials that manufacturers
need to create consumer products. Parts producers such as the car
seating and E-Systems engineering company Lear rely on distributors to
move their products and technology to automobile manufacturers. Using a
distributor allows Lear to focus on its center of
excellence---researching, designing, and building innovative seating
technology solutions for vehicles.

Agents in the B2B space represent companies who produce industrial
products and services and serve as an intermediary between the producer
and the business user. The value of the agent is similar in the B2B
space as it is in the B2C space. Agents add value by addressing product-
or service-related questions and concerns. They typically earn a
commission or a fee off the sale of the industrial product.

For more complex industrial marketing channels with global business
users, producers will work with agents who partner directly with
distributors to move products. For example, the automobile industry
relies on agents and distributors to reach business users. According to
Global Fleet, the largest fleet vehicle management company in the world,
of the 313 million vehicles driven in the United States and Canada,
about 9 million are corporate cars. Element Fleet Management, based out
of Toronto, Ontario, manages corporate vehicle fleets across the United
States, Canada, and Mexico. Companies whose operations reach global
markets typically rely on a much more complex channel that involves
multiple layers of intermediaries to distribute products and services to
business customers.

# Other Marketing Systems {#sect-00008}

Manufacturers or producers along with their intermediary channel
partners work in a system to move products and services to consumers.
There are four major system types: a vertical marketing system, a
horizontal marketing system, a multichannel marketing system, and an
omnichannel marketing system. We'll explore each of these systems next.

## Vertical Marketing System {#sect-00009}

A vertical marketing system (VMS) is a system in which companies in the
marketing channel work together in a coordinated, collaborative, and
customer-centric way. Unlike conventional systems, vertical marketing
systems are less concerned with their profit margins and have a
laser-like focus on working together to deliver value to consumers.

A VMS is unique in that all members of the marketing channel work as one
unified group. Producers, wholesalers, and distributors share the common
goal of creating and delivering value to consumers. In contrast, a
conventional system is one in which each intermediary works as a
distinct company, each trying to maximize profits at the expense of
other channel members. VMS has grown in popularity over the conventional
system because it results in fewer channel conflicts and increased
customer value.

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
Marketing Systems
:::

To learn more about how marketing systems work, check out these videos:

What Is a Channel System?

[Marketing - What is a Channel System?](#)

What Is a Vertical Marketing System?

[Marketing - Vertical Marketing System](#)
::::

In [\#](#), observe the structural differences between the conventional
marketing system (part A) and the vertical marketing system (part B). In
the conventional model, the manufacturer sells to wholesalers, who then
sell to retailers, who then sell to consumers. In the vertical marketing
system, channel members are working together as strategic partners to
distribute products to consumers.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

There are three types of vertical marketing systems: corporate,
administered, and contractual (see [\#](#)). In a *corporate VMS*, one
member of the distribution channel owns the other members. For example,
Walmart manufacturers its own private label brand of beauty and health
products under the name Equate. Walmart not only controls the
manufacturing of products under the brand but also owns and operate the
wholesaler that distributes Equate-branded products to Walmart stores
all over the world. Walmart reduces risk by owning and thus controlling
the various channel members in its VMS. The corporate VMS approach
allows for a unified system of creating and delivering customer value.

In an administered VMS, there is no ownership of channel members.
However, there is one member who is large and powerful enough to
coordinate and manage the distribution activities of other channels
members. For example, Procter & Gamble manufacturers 65 brands in over
10 product categories. Given its size and power, it requires a high
level of cooperation among wholesalers and retailers.

In a contractual VMS, there are independent companies that have joined
together by contract for a mutually beneficial purpose. Each company
operates independently of the others but integrates its activities to
achieve its goals. An example of a contractual VMS is a franchise
organization, such as Chipotle or McDonald's, in which the companies
contract with a wholesaler to distribute products to the franchisees.

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

## Horizontal Marketing System {#sect-00010}

In a horizontal marketing system, unrelated companies partner to offer
products and services in a shared space. For example, J.Crew and New
Balance have partnered together for the last decade to sell a unique
line of New Balance--branded sneakers that can only be found on J.Crew's
website. In a horizontal system, companies partner to leverage the value
they create for customers in a collaborative way.

## Multichannel Marketing System {#sect-00011}

A multichannel distribution system is where a single company sets up
multiple distribution channels to reach customers. For example, Nike has
brick-and-mortar stores across major cities. Customers can visit the
store, try on shoes and apparel, and make a purchase. In addition to
physical stores, Nike also distributes its shoes and apparel through its
online store Nike.com, through e-tailers like Amazon.com, and through
other brick-and-mortar stores like Kohl's and Foot Locker.

## Omnichannel Marketing System {#sect-00012}

An omnichannel marketing system is a multichannel approach whereby
companies give consumers a variety of ways to purchase, receive, and
return products. For example, in addition to purchasing products online
and in-store, Dick's Sporting Goods offers customers a variety of
options for receiving a product. Consumers can buy online and pick up
in-store. They can also buy online from one of the store's kiosks and
have it delivered to their home or some other location. Omnichannel
marketing systems are designed to offer consumers a seamless buying
experience, which further creates and delivers value.

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
Omnichannel
:::

To learn more about an omnichannel marketing system, check out these
videos:

Ted Talk: Omnichannel: Retail (R)evolution

[Omnichannel: Retail (R)evolution \| Kilian Wagner \| TEDxHSG](#)

Teredata: Omni-Channel Retailing

[Omni-Channel Retailing](#)
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00013}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00014}

:::: {#rf-004 .note}
::: title
:::

4\.

Daniel Bland, "Largest Vehicle Fleet Management, Leasing Players in
North America," Global Fleet: The Executive Network, Nexus
Communications, updated July 7, 2021,
https://www.globalfleet.com/en/leasing-and-rental/north-america/features/largest-vehicle-fleet-management-leasing-players-north-america.
::::

# 

administered VMS

one type of vertical marketing system where there is no ownership of
channel members but instead one member who is large enough to coordinate
and manage the distribution activities of other channels members

business-to-business (B2B)

a market comprised of companies who buy from and/or sell to other
companies

business-to-consumer (B2C)

a market comprised of companies that manufacture and sell products or
services directly to a final consumer or end user

contractual VMS

independent companies that have joined together by contract for a
mutually beneficial purpose

corporate VMS

when one member of the distribution channel owns the other members

direct channel

when companies sell and distribute their products directly to consumers

direct marketing channel

when a manufacturer does not use intermediaries but rather involves the
manufacturer distributing its market offering directly to consumers

horizontal marketing system

a group of unrelated companies that offer products and services in a
shared space

indirect channel

involves the utilization of one or more intermediaries to distribute a
market offering to consumers

multichannel distribution system

where a single company sets up multiple distribution channels to reach
customers

omnichannel marketing system

multichannel approach whereby companies give consumers a variety of ways
to purchase, receive, and return products

producer

a company that supplies the raw materials that manufacturers need to
create consumer products

producer to retailer to consumer channel

when manufacturers or producers sell to retailers without the use of
wholesalers or distributors

vertical marketing system

companies in the marketing channel that work together in a coordinated,
collaborative, and customer-centric way
