m00112

ac33c93d-b8f8-4ca5-926d-33181d5c16a3

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify the factors that influence channel choice in distribution.

Describe the different types of target market coverage.

Discuss the buyer requirements influencing channel choice.

Explain the product-related factors influencing channel choice.

Describe the cost factors influencing channel choice.

# Target Market Coverage {#sect-00002}

Target market coverage is defined as having the resources and
capabilities to reach and serve consumers in a company's target market.
Companies of all sizes must determine precisely how they will reach
consumers with their products and services. Smaller companies tend to
focus on smaller, more local markets, while larger companies must meet
the consumer demand of larger, even global markets. A company's decision
about which channel is best for meeting the needs of consumers involves
a number of considerations.

The first factor that plays an important role in channel choice is
target market coverage. Companies must analyze the size of their target
market and their budget and ensure they have the appropriate coverage.
For example, a small local bakery may only target towns in its area;
therefore, its target market coverage is rather small. Kohlberg &
Company, the owner of the Sara Lee and Thomas' brands, on the other
hand, reaches global consumers and therefore requires far greater market
coverage.

Depending on the size of their target market and the products and
services they sell, companies must decide between an intensive,
selective, or exclusive distribution strategy.

## Intensive Distribution {#sect-00003}

Intensive distribution is a strategy that entails distributing a
company's market offering through all possible intermediaries. With an
intensive distribution, a consumer is able to find a company's product
virtually everywhere. Intensive distribution makes sense for products
that compete in a competitive market where consumers can easily choose
an alternative if a company's product isn't available.

Coca-Cola and Kraft, for example, use intensive distribution so that
consumers around the world can access their products everywhere and
anywhere they'd shop for food and beverages.

## Selective Distribution {#sect-00004}

Selective distribution is a strategy that includes choosing more than
one, but fewer than all possible intermediaries to distribute a
company's market offering. Companies choose selective distribution when
they don't need the expansive coverage that intensive distribution
provides but still need to reach their target market at specific retail
outlets. Large appliance companies such as Whirlpool and General
Electric use selective distribution by making their products available
through their dealer networks and at selective large retailers like
Lowe's and Home Depot.

## Exclusive Distribution {#sect-00005}

In direct contrast to an intensive distribution strategy, some companies
intentionally use an exclusive distribution strategy. Exclusive
distribution is a strategy that involves allowing a limited number of
intermediaries to distribute a company's market offering. Luxury brand
Rolex, for example, allows a limited number of retailers to sell its
luxury watches. The exclusivity of these retailers reinforces Rolex's
distinctive position of being a luxurious, hard-to-get brand.

# Fulfillment of Buyer Requirements {#sect-00006}

In addition to determining target market coverage, companies must also
consider a channel's ability to fulfill the requirements of buyers.
Consumers have specific product and service expectations that must be
fulfilled in order to satisfy their wants and needs. For example, when
consumers purchase bottled water, they expect the bottle to be filled to
the top, the cap to be sealed before opening, and the water to taste
fresh and clean. With these buyer requirements in mind, companies who
make bottled water must ensure that they work with channel members who
are able to fulfill these buyer requirements because these requirements
are critical to the perception of consumer value.

## Information {#sect-00007}

Companies who recognize that buyers require information to make a
decision between competing products may work with channel members who
can provide these services. Consumers with limited knowledge of a
product, for example, may be more likely to purchase that product after
an in-store demonstration, for example. Grocery retailers like Whole
Foods will often host in-store demonstrations of new food products for
shoppers to sample (see [\#](#)). Providing this service makes Whole
Foods a desirable channel partner for start-up food brands looking to
break into a highly competitive market. In another example, Ace Hardware
may be a perfect channel partner for a new brand of tools because of Ace
Hardware's reputation for being "the helpful place." Working with a
channel member who can provide the service of in-store demonstrations
creates value for the consumer and thus is a factor in determining
channel choice.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

## Convenience {#sect-00008}

In some cases, buyers demand convenience and will only purchase products
and services that are in close proximity to where they live, work, or
shop. Companies must consider whether their target customers value
convenience. For example, buyers shopping for chewing gum likely value
convenience much more than buyers shopping for skis. Companies whose
buyers require convenience should choose retail outlets that are
convenient and hassle-free.

## Variety {#sect-00009}

Companies must also consider how their target market values variety.
Imagine walking into a pet supply store and only seeing one type of pet
food. Buyers generally have a desire to choose from a variety of
competing products. Petco and PetSmart recognize that consumers
appreciate variety in everything from pet food to pet supplies such as
toys, leashes, and bedding. For companies who compete in a crowded
market where buyers have many options, selecting outlets that offer a
variety of similar and competing products makes the most sense.

## Pre- or Post-Sale Service {#sect-00010}

Pre-sale service entails all the activities that help a buyer make a
purchase decision, while post-sale service entails all the activities
that help a buyer recognize the value of the product. A pre-sale service
can be observed at a car dealership where shoppers are invited to
test-drive a vehicle and apply for financing. Post-sale service in this
same example would be the offering of vehicle services, such as free oil
changes and tire rotations for the life of the vehicle.

For some companies, the service that's provided before and after the
sale is critical to customer-perceived value. Customer-perceived value
is the overall perception that a consumer has about a company, brand, or
product and is measured by what the consumer is willing to pay in return
for the features and benefits in the market offering. Companies that
sell large appliances and furniture, for example, understand that
consumers value haul-away services. For example, for an additional fee,
Lowe's offers customers the option of having their old appliance hauled
away and their new appliance installed. These complementary services are
important because they add value to the customer's product experience
(see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

# Product-Related Factors {#sect-00011}

In addition to target market coverage and requirements of the buyer,
there are product-related factors that can influence channel decisions.
Product-related factors include things like unit value, perishability,
and the bulk and weight of a product. These factors can influence the
distribution decisions that companies make (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

## Unit Value {#sect-00012}

A product's unit value, or the price that a company charges for one unit
or item, can influence channel length decisions. Channel length relates
to the number of intermediaries in the marketing channel. For example,
products with high unit values, such as cars, boats, and airplanes, will
have a much shorter distribution channel than nonperishable products,
such as crackers, bandages, and tissues, which have a low unit value.
Because of the complexities and costs of moving heavy or awkward
products, companies seek a shorter distribution channel to mitigate
these factors. There are companies that specialize in moving more
expensive and complex products.

## Perishability {#sect-00013}

Perishability relates to the likelihood that a product will spoil,
decay, or expire if not used in a timely manner. A product's
perishability also influences channel decisions. For example,
orange-juice maker Tropicana's marketing channel looks much different
than Nabisco's Ritz Crackers' channel. Because orange juice must be kept
cold throughout the distribution process, Tropicana makes channel
decisions that allow it to protect the integrity of the product
throughout the distribution process. Working with channel partners who
are experts at storing, handling, and moving perishable products is one
of the most important factors for companies who manufacture perishable
products.

Alongside unit value, perishability can also influence channel length.
Companies marketing perishable goods such as milk, cheese, and meat
products require a shorter distribution channel because these products
have a limited shelf life.

## Bulk and Weight {#sect-00014}

Much like a product's unit value, the bulk and weight of a product
influence channel length. The bulk and weight of a product is the
density and heaviness of one unit of product. Companies that sell larger
and heavier items are more likely to use a direct or short distribution
channel to avoid issues that arise when too many intermediaries handle a
product. For example, because hot tubs or personal spas are bulky and
heavy, they are more prone to product damage during distribution.
Furthermore, there are typically fewer intermediaries between the
manufacturer and the customer in order to mitigate the high costs
associated with distributing hot tubs.

## Standardization {#sect-00015}

The standardization of a product also impacts channel decisions.
Products that are standardized have no differences in how they are
manufactured. Standardized products are uniform and consistent.
Agricultural products, such as grain and corn, are standardized.
Consumers are unable to tell the difference between these products
because of their standardization. Standardized products have a longer
channel length than customized products. Customized products are adapted
depending on the customer's needs. They typically require a shorter
distribution channel. Companies must consider the impact of
standardization before making channel decisions.

## Technical Nature of a Product {#sect-00016}

Products sold in the tech space are typically more complex and often
require an onboarding process. For example, the customer-relationship
management firm Salesforce offers companies a cloud-based application
that allows it to manage millions of contacts or people as they move
along the sales cycle from lead to prospect to customer. Products with a
technical component often have a short channel length, meaning there is
no intermediary between the company and the business consumer. They are
distributed directly to business consumers (or B2B) because of the
onboarding, implementation, training, support, and maintenance aspects
of the product. Companies that use Salesforce have access to a customer
relationship management expert who ensures that the program is being
used and managed effectively in order for the customer to get the most
out of the product.

## Product Life-Cycle Stage {#sect-00017}

A product's life-cycle stage may also impact channel decisions. Product
life cycle refers to the various stages that a product goes through from
its introduction phase, to its growth and maturity phase, and in some
cases to its decline phase. For example, during the introduction phase
of a product's life cycle, where profits and consumer knowledge of a
product are low, companies may make more conservative channel decisions.
As the product enters the growth stage, companies may expand
distribution to meet consumer demand. As the product enters the maturity
stage and ultimately the decline state, a company must ensure that its
distribution strategy aligns with its changing consumer demand.

# Profitability {#sect-00018}

The profitability of a channel can also influence channel decisions.
Profitability relates to the amount of money that stands to be gained
after a company pays its expenses. A simple way to calculate
profitability is to subtract these expenses from the revenue generated.

Companies must evaluate not just the revenue generated by working with
channel partners but also the channel member's ability to operate
profitably. Channels that are not able to manage distribution costs
effectively are less attractive for companies seeking to earn a profit.
Companies ultimately have an obligation to be profitable, and choosing
channel partners that help them achieve their overarching goals is more
desirable than those who cannot.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00019}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00020}

:::: {#rf-005 .note}
::: title
:::

5\.

Technavio,

Hot Tub Market Growth, Size, Trends, Analysis Report by Type,
Application, Region and Segment Forecast 2020--2024

, August 2021,
https://www.technavio.com/report/hot-tub-market-industry-analysis.
::::

# 

bulk and weight

the density and heaviness of one unit of product

channel length

relates to the number of intermediaries in the marketing channel

customer-perceived value

the overall perception that a consumer has about a company, brand, or
product and is measured by what the consumer is willing to pay in return
for the features and benefits in the market offering

exclusive distribution

a strategy that involves allowing a limited number of intermediaries to
distribute a company's market offering

intensive distribution

a distribution strategy that entails distributing a company's market
offering through all possible intermediaries

perishability

relates to the likelihood that a product will spoil, decay, or expire if
not used in a timely manner

post-sale service

all activities provided by a company that reinforce the value of the
product or service for the buyer

pre-sale service

all activities provided by a company that help a buyer make a purchase
decision

product life cycle

the various stages that a product goes through from its introduction
phase, to its growth and maturity phase, and in some cases to its
decline phase

selective distribution

a strategy that includes choosing more than one, but fewer than all
possible intermediaries to distribute a company's market offering

standardized

products that have no difference in how they are manufactured

target market coverage

resources and capabilities needed to reach consumers in a company's
target market

unit value

the price that a company charges for one unit or item
