m00113

997062c3-56b0-449f-aa81-eb79a555e0dd

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Describe how channel members are selected.

Explain how channel members are managed and motivated.

Discuss how channel conflict is handled.

Summarize the metrics used for channel member evaluation.

# Selecting Channel Members {#sect-00002}

After a manufacturer has evaluated its distribution channel options, it
now needs to select the right channel members and manage and motivate
them to operate effectively and efficiently. In addition, the
manufacturer must also address any conflicts that may arise in the
marketing channel. A channel member, also known as an intermediary, is a
company that works in a network with other companies to help move
products from manufacturers to final consumers. Channel members perform
a variety of important tasks that collectively create value for the
consumer.

The channel members that a company selects depends entirely on the
company's evaluation of the channel member alternatives. Manufacturers
should examine each channel member's years in business and experience
carrying product lines. They should also evaluate each member's
reputation and its profitability. PetVivo, maker of biomedical devices
for pets, selected Vetcove to distribute a device for pets with
osteoporosis. Because PetVivo needed to reach veterinary hospitals and
clinics across all 50 states, Vetcove was the right choice because of
its experience serving over 13,000 veterinary hospitals and clinics. Its
expertise and reputation were attractive characteristics for PetVivo.

# Managing and Motivating Channel Members {#sect-00003}

After channel members have been selected, manufacturers must
continuously manage and motivate members to work together to achieve
their collective goals. It's similar to a partnership or relationship
where companies depend on one another to marshal the product along the
marketing channel.

The qualities of an effective channel relationship include
collaboration, transparency, and cohesion. When members work together
toward a common goal of delivering value to the consumer, the channel is
more effective. Companies like L'Oréal and Procter & Gamble must work
harmoniously to build mutually beneficial relationships with their
distribution network because it\'s critical to meeting the needs of
their consumers. Failure to do so could be detrimental to channel
members if customer value declines because of conflict.

In addition to managing relationships, manufacturers must also find ways
to reinforce channel member performance. Manufacturers can provide
incentives, such as bonuses and other types of rewards, when channel
members meet the manufacturer's goals. In addition to incentives,
manufacturers can also listen to and support channel members by
providing them with helpful sales materials, product samples, and the
right messaging.

# Evaluating Channel Members {#sect-00004}

Manufacturers must systematically evaluate channel member performance to
ensure that each member is meeting standards. Failure to evaluate
performance can lead to inefficiencies in the channel and a decline in
customer-perceived value.

# Handling Channel Conflict {#sect-00005}

Sometimes channel members experience conflict during the distribution
process. Channel conflict is when companies in the distribution channel
have disagreements due to a competitive versus collaborative mindset.
For example, a channel member may cause conflict because its focus isn't
on creating value but on driving down costs at the expense of the
customer. This could create conflict in the channel if channel partners
and ultimately consumers are impacted by an excessive profit
orientation.

## Vertical Conflict {#sect-00006}

A vertical conflict is a conflict that exists between different levels
of a vertical channel. When the goals of manufacturers, wholesalers, and
retailers aren't aligned in the marketing channel, the customer will
ultimately suffer, either by paying more for a product or experiencing a
product shortage.

Disintermediation is the process of removing an intermediary from a
marketing channel. It occurs when manufacturers have discovered an
opportunity to sell directly to end users or final consumers. It can
also occur if a manufacturer pivots from its traditional distribution
strategy to something completely different. In a classic example, the
birth of Apple iTunes essentially put traditional outlets for purchasing
music out of business. In another example, traditional movie theaters
are experiencing disintermediation as streaming services like Netflix
and HBOMax are releasing new films that 10 years ago would have been
released only in theaters.

## Horizontal Conflict {#sect-00007}

A horizontal conflict is when there is disagreement among firms at the
same level in the marketing channel. For example, Holiday Inn has a
variety of locations in New York City. If one Holiday Inn drives its
prices down to outcompete its partners, that could cause conflict among
the other Holiday Inn locations that perceive it as stealing customers
through pricing tactics.

## The Use of Metrics in Evaluating Channel Members {#sect-00008}

In order to evaluate channel performance, companies use key metrics
including inventory turnover rate, order accuracy rate, time to ship,
total units in storage, and percentage of on-time shipments. By
monitoring these metrics, companies can assess their performance and
make adjustments as needed. [\#](#) presents key metrics used in
evaluating channel member performance. Let's look at each of these more
closely.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Inventory turnover rate is a metric that measures how quickly inventory
is turned over or sold. Trader Joe's faced a dilemma with the COVID-19
pandemic as consumers stocked up on nonperishable goods like pasta and
rice. As consumer demand increased, Trader Joe's supply warehouses were
virtually empty as they waited for new inventory to come in. When
metrics fall outside what a company considers normal or acceptable, it
can then make adjustments, such as introduce new products to fill demand
as in the case of Trader Joe's.

Order accuracy rate is an important ecommerce metric. It measures the
percentage of orders that are processed, fulfilled, and shipped to
consumers without any errors. If you've purchased a pair of sneakers and
the wrong size arrives at your home, this constitutes order inaccuracy.
These errors can be costly to companies, who then need to process,
fulfill, and send another order.

Time to ship, also known as order cycle time, is the length of time from
when a customer places an order to when it reaches them. Amazon has
redefined consumer expectations related to shipping. With high
expectations that purchased items will arrive quickly, online shoppers
say that delivery time influences their purchase decision. The
time-to-ship metric is a useful tool to measure how quickly a
manufacturer can get its products through channel members to consumers.

Total units in storage is a metric used to evaluate warehouse
efficiency. This is a real-time metric that changes as items are sold
and leave the warehouse and new inventory moves in. This metric also
provides insight into warehousing and inventory costs as well as the
number of SKUs, or stock-keeping units, a warehouse is managing at any
given time. SKUs are unique numbers assigned to every single product in
a warehouse.

The total number of orders is an important metric. The total number of
orders is the sum of all orders that a company received in a given time
period. It provides insight into consumer demand and helps manufacturers
to plan accordingly. For seasonal products like winter coats and
pumpkin-flavored cookies, the total number of orders may fluctuate
throughout the year. Evaluating the total number of orders over time
helps manufacturers watch for fluctuations and plan accordingly.

Percentage of on-time shipments is a metric used to evaluate how well a
channel member meets its promise of delivering goods on time. This
metric is especially important to industries that market perishable
goods like meat and dairy. Imagine if the Greek yogurt manufacturer
Chobani (see [\#](#)) worked with an intermediary that only met its
delivery date 50 percent of the time. This would directly impact the
shelf life of the product at the retail level and cost everyone in the
channel money.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

Alongside time to ship, measuring average delivery days looks at the
average number of days it takes shipping carriers to deliver purchased
goods to consumers. This is important to consumers who value the timely
delivery of products purchased online. Manufacturers may choose to work
with a company like Amazon because of its core competency of fulfilling
and delivering products to consumers relatively quickly.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00009}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00010}

:::: {#rf-006 .note}
::: title
:::

6\.

"Petvivo Holdings, Inc. Announces Distribution of Its Veterinary Medical
Device, Spryng

TM

, by Vetcove, Inc.," Yahoo! Finance, Yahoo, January 5, 2022,
https://finance.yahoo.com/news/petvivo-holdings-inc-announces-distribution-123000670.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-007 .note}
::: title
:::

7\.

Jennifer Strailey, "Trader Joe's Talks Supply Chain, TP and a Return to
Normalcy," Winsight Grocery Business, Winsight, May 4, 2020,
https://www.winsightgrocerybusiness.com/retailers/trader-joes-talks-supply-chain-tp-return-normalcy.
::::

# 

channel conflict

disagreements between companies in the marketing channel due to a
competitive versus a collaborative mindset

channel member (intermediary)

a company that works in a network with other companies to help gets
products from manufacturers to final consumers

disintermediation

the process of removing an intermediary from a marketing channel

horizontal conflict

when there is disagreement among firms at the same level in the
marketing channel

inventory turnover rate

a metric that measures how quickly inventory is turned over, or sold

order accuracy rate

a metric that measures the percentage of orders that are processed,
fulfilled, and shipped to consumers without any errors

percentage of on-time shipments

a metric used to evaluate how well a channel member meets its promise of
delivering goods on time

time to ship

also known as order cycle time, the length of time from when a customer
places an order to when it reaches them

total number of orders

the sum of all orders that a company received in a given time period

total units in storage

a metric used to evaluate warehouse efficiency that changes as items are
sold and leave the warehouse and new inventory moves in

vertical conflict

a conflict that exists between different levels of a vertical channel
