m00114

18393d7c-73bf-4a00-b46b-fbb9e85619ce

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define supply chain management (SCM).

Explain the role of marketing in supply chain management.

Describe the various functions of supply chain management.

# Supply Chain Management (SCM) Defined {#sect-00002}

A supply chain is the entire process of distribution from acquiring the
raw materials needed to make products to delivering final goods to
consumers. Companies with high-performing supply chains recognize that
it starts with a customer-centered mindset. All activities must be
managed with the end goal of creating and delivering value to the target
consumer.

Supply chain management (SCM) is the process of managing all the members
and activities from the procurement and transformation of raw materials
into finished goods through their distribution to targeted consumers.

# The Role of Marketing in Supply Chain Management {#sect-00003}

Marketing plays an integral role in the management of the supply chain.
Marketing entails creating and delivering products that meet the needs
of customers all while building relationships through customer
engagement. Companies ensure that they deliver on their value
proposition to consumers through the features and benefits of the
product itself. Ensuring fulfillment of a company's value proposition
starts with working with the right suppliers who provide the materials
and ingredients to help companies fulfill their promise.

For example, Dave's Killer Bread (DKB) has positioned itself as the
maker of "the best bread you've ever tasted, power-packed with organic
whole grain nutrition." The promise to consumers starts with selecting
suppliers who are certified organic and who can consistently deliver
high-quality ingredients. DKB's promise to consumers starts as far back
as the grains selected by DKB's suppliers.

# Functions of Supply Chain Management {#sect-00004}

Supply chain management has five major functions. These include
purchasing, operations, logistics, resource management, and information
workflow (see [\#](#)). Good supply chains perform these functions in a
way that meets the wants and needs of final consumers efficiently.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

## Purchasing {#sect-00005}

Purchasing is the process of buying materials needed to manufacture
products. These materials are purchased from suppliers, who must be able
to deliver them in accordance with the manufacturer's timeline.
Therefore, the manufacturer's companies and suppliers must communicate
and coordinate to ensure timely delivery of materials.

For example, Ben & Jerry's ice cream flavor Mint Chocolate Chance has
cream, skim milk, sugar, egg yolks, white flour, cocoa powder, soybean
oil, and vanilla extract, among other ingredients. Ben and Jerry's must
forecast the number of ingredients it needs to purchase so that these
amounts match the demand for this particular flavor. The company, in
turn, assesses things like total number of orders and inventory turnover
for its Mint Chocolate Chance product to help forecast the quantity of
ingredients it will need from suppliers.

## Operations {#sect-00006}

Operations is everything a company does on a day-to-day basis to run a
company. Before a company purchases the needed materials and begins
production, it must forecast demand for its products. Forecasting
involves anticipating or projecting how many units of a product will be
sold during a given period. Accurate forecasting must align with
inventory management and production schedules to ensure that the company
is operationally positioned to manufacture the right amount of product
to meet the needs of consumers.

## Logistics {#sect-00007}

Logistics is a function that involves the coordination of all supply
chain activities, such as warehousing, inventory management, and
transportation. Companies along the supply chain must communicate
effectively to ensure that products reach consumers in a timely and
efficient way in the precise form that the consumer expects. For
example, when consumers eat McDonald's French fries, they expect the
fries to taste a certain way. Suppliers and intermediaries along the
channel work together to ensure that those expectations are met. Good
logistical management helps ensure this.

## Resource Management {#sect-00008}

Resource management is the planning, organizing, and controlling of
resources. Resources include the labor, the raw materials, and the
technology that are required to move products from their raw material
phase to finished goods available for consumption. Effective supply
chain management requires the right allocation of these resources to the
right supply chain activities to optimize the entire system.

## Information Workflow {#sect-00009}

Information workflow is a supply chain management function that relates
to what and how information moves between members of the supply chain.
If information doesn't flow effectively or communication is poor, the
entire process can suffer as a result of disruptions, delays, and
mistakes. Employing a systematic approach to sharing information across
the supply chain ensures that the right companies have the right data to
make the right decisions at the right time.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
Supply Chain Management
:::

To learn more about how supply chain management works, review the
following article and video: [IBM and Supply Chain Management](#).
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00010}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# 

logistics

the coordination of all supply chain activities, such as warehousing,
inventory management, and transportation

purchasing

the process of buying materials needed to manufacture products

supply chain

a network between a company and its suppliers to produce and distribute
a specific product to the final buyer

supply chain management

all members and activities from the procurement and transformation of
raw materials into finished goods through their distribution to targeted
consumers
