m00115

43f49678-07ed-479e-b75d-b7677ce83f80

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define and describe logistics.

Explain the functions of logistics.

Describe logistics information management.

Describe integrated logistics management.

Characterize third-party logistics (3PL) providers.

# Logistics Defined {#sect-00002}

An important function of the supply is logistics, which includes all the
activities involved in the flow of products from manufacturers to
consumers. Logistics is the planning, organizing, and controlling of the
movement of raw materials and ultimately finished goods from
manufacturers to final consumers.

For example, the logistics involved in getting orange juice to consumers
includes a variety of activities, such as packing and transporting. It
is critical that there is a coordinated effort between all channel
members involved in that process. The functions or purpose of logistics
is explored next.

# Functions of Logistics {#sect-00003}

Getting products from manufacturers to final consumers requires the
coordinated efforts of all channel members. These efforts require an
understanding of key activities that need to occur as products flow
through the marketing channel. The major functions of logistics explored
next include warehousing, inventory management, and transportation.

Warehousing is the stocking, maintaining, and controlling of products
while they await the next step in their journey to the final consumer.
Warehousing requires receiving and storing new stock, picking and
packing ordered items, and shipping products off to their next
destination. Depending on the product, warehousing may also involve
maintaining control of the warehouse's temperature to ensure that
perishable goods or food that needs to be held at a certain temperature
don't spoil.

Inventory management is a function that involves identifying the type of
inventory and how much a company has on hand at any given time. Managing
inventory is a critical logistics function because it ensures that there
isn\'t too much or too little on hand.

Transportation is the physical movement of products by either road,
water, or air (see [\#](#)). Companies must determine which method or
methods of transportation make the most sense given the nature of the
product, the location of the target market, and costs associated with
each method. Transportation also involves all the activities such as the
generation of shipping documents, the calculation of delivery time, and
the need for additional resources like technology or special equipment.
For example, an ice cream manufacturer would need to ensure that the
transportation methods it selects to distribute its products are
temperature controlled to maintain the integrity and safety of the
products.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

There are three factors that companies must consider in selecting a mode
of transportation. First is the product itself. Products that are
hazardous, perishable, or problematic to handle may impact
transportation methods. Location is a second factor that can impact the
mode of transportation. Companies must consider shipping origin, which
is the location where the product is shipping from. They must also
consider the shipping destination, or the location where the product
must land. A company transporting products from China to the United
States, for example, needs to select transportation methods that allow
it to move products over large bodies of water. The third factor
impacting transportation methods is any special considerations related
to time or urgency. Companies need to consider how quickly they need
products moved from origin to destination. There are a variety of
transportation methods available, including trucking, rail, water
carriers, air carriers, or some combination of these.

In [\#](#) different modes of transportation are presented along with
their relative speed of delivery, cost, and accessibility. Accessibility
means how readily available or convenient the mode of transportation is.
For example, trucking is an accessible mode of transportation because of
the strong road infrastructure in the United States. Let's compare the
different modes of transportation based on these characteristics.

Trucking or road transportation makes the most sense for companies that
are transporting between destinations that are connected by land. It is
highly accessible, meaning that trucking is readily available to
companies looking for a low-cost mode of transportation.

Rail is a second mode of transportation that is best suited for moving
goods in cases where speed of delivery is not urgent and low
transportation costs are important. Similar to rail, water carriers
offer an even slower mode of transportation at an even lower cost than
rail, making it a popular mode for moving consumer goods from China to
the United States.

For some companies, more than one mode of transportation is needed.
Multimodal transportation involves companies using two or more types of
transportation to move goods from origin to destination. For example,
Apple may use air to ship iPhones to European airports but then trucks
to continue the journey in getting iPhones to warehouses or distribution
centers and retailers.

  *Mode*           *Speed*     *Cost*      *Accessibility*
  ---------------- ----------- ----------- -----------------
  Trucking         Moderate    Low         High
  Railroads        Slow        Low         Moderate
  Water Carriers   Very slow   Very low    Moderate
  Air Carriers     Fast        Very high   Low
  Digital          Very fast   Very low    Very High

  : Modes of Transportation and Relative Factors {#table-00001}

# Logistics Information Management {#sect-00004}

For a supply chain to be effective, manufacturers, suppliers, channel
members, and customers need useful logistical information that can help
them make informed decisions. Logistics information management is the
recording and reporting of useful information that channel members can
analyze and validate during the process of moving products.

Channel members use a system to access and manage logistics information
in real time. This information allows members to develop demand
forecasts, where they predict what and how much consumers will demand in
the future, which in turn helps them to make decisions about how much
raw materials and other supplies they need to meet consumer demand.

# Integrated Logistics Management {#sect-00005}

Integrated logistics management means that every element of logistics
works cohesively to ensure that products flow from manufacturer to final
consumer in an efficient and effective way. Companies must first begin
by defining the objectives of logistics management. For example, in the
procurement and distribution of agricultural products, the supply chain
might collectively set objectives that everyone along the chain commits
to. They may, for example, set objectives to minimize costs, meet
delivery times 95 percent of the time, and communicate openly and
honestly about product availability and product flow in a consistent and
systematic way. Or they may strive cohesively to manage inventory more
effectively to reduce the possibility of shortage or surplus.

Whatever objectives they set for the supply chain, each member strives
to integrate its activities and information with the activities and
information of other members to ensure cohesive and synergistic handling
of products for the ultimate purpose of meeting the wants and needs of
the consumer.

## Third-Party Logistics (3PL) Providers {#sect-00006}

A third-party logistics provider is a company that is contracted by a
channel member to handle one or more of the functional areas of
logistics. 3PL providers can be warehouses, distribution centers, or
fulfillment centers that have expertise in managing certain logistical
activities.

The advantages of working with 3PL providers is that logistics is their
core competency, it is less expensive to outsource, and they offer
flexibility. Owning warehouses and trucking systems requires a great
deal of capital. Companies would much rather work with a 3PL provider
than assume the financial risk of owning and operating their own
transportation and warehousing systems.

Imagine if pet food maker Purina had to purchase its own warehousing and
trucking business to store and move its goods all over the United
States. It would be very costly and require a large capital commitment.
In addition, 3PL providers offer the advantage of strategic location.
They often market themselves as being located in the precisely right
zones that a supply chain needs to reach targeted consumers.

The downside of using 3PL providers is the loss of control.
Manufacturers are essentially turning over logistics responsibilities to
other companies, who assume control of communication and interaction
with suppliers. To combat this, manufacturers should continuously
analyze performance metrics and communicate with 3PL providers.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00007}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# 

inventory management

a function that involves identifying the type of inventory and how much
a company has on hand at any given time

third-party logistics (3PL) provider

a company that is contracted by a channel member to handle one or more
of the functional areas of logistics; often warehouses, distribution
centers, or fulfillment centers that have expertise in managing certain
logistical activities

warehousing

the stocking, maintaining, and controlling of products while they await
the next step in their journey to the final consumer
