m00138

f0d9667b-359f-4fbb-b355-6f7d23f3565a

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Discuss the issue of the carbon footprint versus the speed of shipping.

Discuss the issue of sourcing sustainably.

# Carbon Footprint versus the Speed of Shipping {#sect-00002}

As companies strive to deliver the right products to the right customers
at the right time, they are faced with the competing interest of
protecting the environment in which they operate.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
Environmental Responsibility in the Supply Chain
:::

To learn more about environmental responsibility in the supply chain,
watch the following video: Value, Speed, Environmental and Societal
Impact -- HP's Supply Chain.

[Value, Speed, Environmental and Societal Impact \| HP\'s Supply Chain
\| HP](#)
::::

Sustainability is a company's effort to reduce its impact on the
environment as products move from source procurement through production
through distribution to final consumers. Companies that practice
sustainability balance their goal of speedy delivery with a commitment
to reducing their carbon footprint. While traditional marketing channels
focus on speed and cost, a sustainable channel also factors in goals
aimed at mitigating the harm the supply chain causes to both humans and
the environment.

# Sourcing Sustainably {#sect-00003}

Sustainable sourcing is the process of considering suppliers' social,
ethical, and environmental performance. The benefits of sourcing
sustainably are improved reputation, brand protection, and an
opportunity to attract new consumers and reach new markets. When a
company claims it sources sustainably, it means that it is both
transparent and ethical regarding the raw materials it uses in its
products. It is not only transparent and ethical in its sourcing of
materials but also environmentally conscious about its manufacturing
process.

The shoe company Allbirds has sought to use natural instead of
petroleum-based synthetic materials, which is what a majority of
footwear is made from. By 2025, it aims for 75 percent of its shoes to
be sustainably sourced using both natural and recycled raw materials.

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
Allbirds
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

For decades, the footwear industry has missed the opportunity to look to
Mother Nature for more sustainable footwear materials. Tim Brown, the
founder of Allbirds, believed it was time to think differently (see
[\#](#)). With most shoe companies using petroleum-based raw materials,
Brown sought to think more sustainably about offering a shoe that was
both comfortable and environmentally friendly. Along with Joey
Zwillinger, a product engineer and renewables guru, Brown developed a
revolutionary wool fabric designed for footwear. Allbirds uses
SweetFoam, a shoe sole material made from plant-based leather. To
increase the durability of the shoe, it also uses recycled synthetics
where needed, which helps extend the life of the product. It is
continuously researching and developing ways to innovate around the
sustainable sourcing of shoe materials with the goals of not only
doubling the lifetime of its products but also reducing its carbon
footprint related to raw materials by 25 percent in 2025.

Sustainability is at the core of everything Allbirds does. While it is
certainly interested in offering consumers a comfortable shoe, it also
cares deeply about the process and materials involved in making that
shoe comfortable.
::::

#  {#sect-00004}

In this chapter, the functions and benefits of marketing channels are
explored. Marketing channels play an important role in moving products
from manufacturers to final consumers. Channel members, also known as
intermediaries, specialize in specific activities that help the flow of
products. They play a transactional role by bringing manufacturers and
consumers together. They also help with the logistical distribution of
products by sorting, storing, and bulk-breaking so consumers can
purchase what they want in the desired quantity. Finally, they
facilitate the flow of goods by doing things like offering consumers
credit to make purchases. Channel members can include manufacturers,
wholesalers, distributers, retailers, agents, brokers, and ultimately
final consumers.

In addition, the types of marketing systems are also explored. Vertical
marketing systems can include corporate, administered, and contractual.
In addition, some companies use a horizontal, multichannel, or
omnichannel marketing system. Factors that dictate the type of channel a
company chooses include target market coverage and the selection of an
intensive, selective, or exclusive distribution channel.

Fulfillment of buyer requirements such as information, convenience,
variety, and service pre- and post-purchase are also important
determining factors. In addition, product-related factors such as
perishability, product life-cycle stage, value, and the technical nature
of a product are also to be considered when choosing a marketing
channel. Lastly, the profitability of the channel is a huge
consideration given that companies aim to operate efficiently while
delivering value to consumers.

Selecting, managing, and motivating channel members require a strategy
to handle channel conflict. Evaluating channel members requires the use
of metrics and includes inventory turnover rate, accuracy rate, the time
it takes to ship, units that have to be stored, number of orders
processed in a given period of time, the percentage of on-time
shipments, and the average number of delivery days.

The functions of supply chain management include purchasing, operations,
logistics, resource management, and information workflow. Any or all of
these functions can be outsourced. The decision requires careful
consideration and evaluation of the cost/benefit ratio. The functions of
logistics, such as warehousing, inventory management, and
transportation, can also be outsourced.

Finally, the ethical issues in supply chain management were discussed.
They include carbon footprint vs. the speed of shipping and sourcing
sustainably.

#  {#sect-00005}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00006}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00007}

Consider what sustainability and social responsibility mean to you. How
do they impact your life and your activities? Is it in a positive,
negative, or neutral way?

Let this information guide you in creating your authentic self. Develop
your awareness of the ways that you can support the movements that speak
to you. For instance, if you have strong beliefs in helping to create a
cleaner environment, find activities that support that. Think clean
stream, neighborhood beautification, or teaching children recycling, all
the while making sure that you are genuine in upholding those concepts
in your life. The list of opportunities is multilayered and unlimited.

Write 200--400 words outlining your personal brand as it relates to
sustainability and social responsibility. How is your personal brand
impacted by these concepts now? With these concepts in mind, how would
you like your personal brand to evolve?

#  {#sect-00008}

Contact one of the following businesses and ask to speak to a person in
the supply chain or logistics department. You might have to go through
several people to actually get to the one that can best answer your
questions. The goal with this exercise is to ask questions regarding the
logistics in these companies to better understand the complex process.
Every logistics department is involved in the movement of goods (the
coming and/or going), but they vary in how they go about it.

A local warehouse

UPS

FedEx

An Amazon.com warehouse (they have multiple layers that you can contact
as well as their logistics partner program)

A trucking company

When you speak to the professional, be prepared with questions that will
help you understand this position. Here are a handful of questions to
get you started:

What is your job title and function?

How would you describe your department?

How did you obtain your position?

What skills, background, or degree are needed to do this type of work?

What are the main challenges faced by the department in the job?

Are you aware of differences in how you run your operations versus a
similar company? If yes, can you outline examples?

#  {#sect-00009}

Complete the following information about the company and
products/services you chose to focus on as you develop the marketing
plan throughout the course. You may need to conduct research in order to
obtain necessary information.

Instructions: Using the Marketing Plan Template file you created from
[Marketing and Customer Value](#) assignment and expanded upon in
[Strategic Planning in Marketing](#), [Market Segmentation, Targeting,
and Positioning](#), [Marketing Research and Market Intelligence](#),
[Products: Consumer Offerings](#), [Pricing Products and Services](#),
and [Integrated Marketing Communications](#), complete the following
section of your marketing plan:

Marketing Strategy: Distribution

Submit the marketing plan to your instructor for grading and feedback.

#  {#sect-00010}

## Global Containers & Custom Packaging Inc. {#sect-00011}

It happens without much thinking---you go online, click on the item, add
it to your cart, pay for it, and then wait for it to arrive, usually in
just a few days. And although you don't give it much thought, there is a
lot going on when making a purchase. It may appear that the product
"just arrives" at your location, but it's not quite that simple. The
manufacturer must decide how to best ship the product, whether it be by
truck, ship, air or some combination of all three of them. Also,
depending on the size of the company that is purchasing the product and
the size of the order of the product, it might make a stop at a
wholesaler before ending up on retail shelves or in your mailbox.

One company that is working "behind the scenes" to ensure that your
package arrives intact and on time is [Global Containers and Custom
Packaging](#). Global Containers and Custom Packaging is a full-service
logistics company. It offers logistics and warehouse management,
packaging distribution, and quality inspection and sorting.

Strategically headquartered along the US-Mexico border in El Paso,
Texas, Global Containers and Custom Packaging offers local packaging
distribution services that provide value and solutions to the retail and
maquiladora market. Customers include companies like Amazon.com, Hewlett
Packard, Honeywell, Align Technology (the makers of Invisalign system
for straightening teeth), and ASO (a leader in consumer first-aid
products).

Started in 2009, the company was founded to provide a full-service
logistics solution. José Ochoa, one of the company's founders, started
off as an industrial engineer and saw a need for a full-service
logistics solution offering a high level of customer service. Some of
the solutions that the company offers are just-in-time inventory
management, report management, flexibility in hours (it will receive a
truck or ship a product after hours or on the weekend with no extra cost
to the client---a service that is practically unheard of in this
industry), traceability of consumption behavior, and coming soon,
accepting crypto payments.

Managing all of the pieces of a logistics solution can be tricky,
especially in an environment with unprecedented shipping delays. Global
Containers and Custom Packaging takes a proactive approach in managing
its clients' business---it will advise customers on upcoming delays on
products that it doesn't currently have in inventory. By staying in
constant contact with the client, it has been able to keep delays and
bottlenecks because of missing items to a minimum. All this is
accomplished while the industry has seen shipping delays skyrocket.

It's not surprising given the company's proactive approach to managing
delays, offering superior customer service and comprehensive offerings,
that it has received the prestigious Bridge Accelerator Award, an award
focused on businesses that are looking for ways to grow and innovate in
the Paso del Norte region.

## Case Questions {#sect-00012}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00013}

:::: {#rf-008 .note}
::: title
:::

8\.

"Killer Breads," Dave's Killer Bread, accessed June 1, 2022,
https://www.daveskillerbread.com/products.
::::

:::: {#rf-009 .note}
::: title
:::

9\.

"Renewable Materials," Allbirds, accessed May 31, 2022,
https://www.allbirds.com/pages/renewable-materials.
::::

:::: {#rf-010 .note}
::: title
:::

10\.

Allbirds, "Renewable Materials."
::::

:::: {#rf-011 .note}
::: title
:::

11\.

https://globalcontainers.net; https://globalcontainers.net/blog/
::::

:::: {#rf-012 .note}
::: title
:::

12\.

"The Bridge Accelerator---Binational Supplier Development Program,"
https://www.tecma.com/the-bridge-accelerator-binational-supplier-development-program/
::::

# 

sustainability

a company's effort to reduce its impact on the environment as products
move from source procurement through production through distribution to
final consumers

sustainable sourcing

the process of considering suppliers' social, ethical, and environmental
performance
