m00001

2f9bf212-8547-462b-a1eb-6cb9ace5d10a

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

There is no denying that COVID-19 affected the entire economy, but
fast-food restaurants were particularly hard-hit when indoor dining was
restricted. McDonald's quickly adapted during the pandemic by focusing
on what it calls the 3 Ds: digital, delivery, and drive-through.

McDonald's had a strong position in terms of digital innovation even
before the pandemic. It had installed self-order kiosks in its
restaurants beginning in 2015 and launched its mobile app (Mobile Order
& Pay) in 2017, allowing customers to browse the menu, find nearby
restaurants, place their orders, and pay within the app. Digital sales
exceeded \$10 billion in 2020, nearly 20 percent of system-wide sales.

The company also tackled the efficiency of its drive-through lanes by
investing in dynamic menu boards and cutting its menu items to its "core
menu." As a result, McDonald's was able to shave 30 seconds from its
drive-through time. That time savings enabled the company to serve 300
million additional drive-through customers.

The pandemic and the subsequent restrictions on indoor dining also led
McDonald's to scale up its delivery platform and the number of
restaurants that offer delivery. By ramping up the number of restaurants
that offer delivery from 28,000 to 41,000 total restaurants, delivery
sales more than tripled.

Focusing on the 3 Ds enabled McDonald's to weather the pandemic and
create a faster, easier, and improved customer experience.

# Endnotes {#sect-00001}

:::: {#rf-001 .note}
::: title
:::

1\.

Daniel Campos, "Committing to the Core: How McDonald's Innovated to
Survive (and Thrive) During the COVID-19 Pandemic," Digital Innovation
and Transformation (February 10, 2021), accessed August 04, 2021,
https://digital.hbs.edu/platform-digit/submission/committing-to-the-core-how-mcdonalds-innovated-to-survive-and-thrive-during-the-covid-19-pandemic/.
::::
