m00002

26033155-e4b9-468c-89d2-1a510ad1c431

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define consumer buying behavior.

Explain the nature of the buyer's black box.

Describe how consumer behavior is characterized into types.

# Consumer Markets and Consumer Buying Behavior Defined {#sect-00002}

How many buying decisions did you make today? Perhaps you stopped on the
way to work or class to buy a soft drink or coffee, went to the grocery
store on the way home to get bread or milk, or ordered something online.
You likely make buying decisions nearly every day and probably don't
give most of those decisions much thought. But the way you make those
decisions is significant for marketers, because if they can understand
*why* you buy what you buy and *when* you buy it, they can use that
information to boost revenue.

Consumer buying behavior refers to the decisions and actions people
undertake to buy products or services for personal use. In other words,
it's the actions you take before buying a product or service, and as you
will see, many factors influence that behavior. You and all other
consumers combine to make up the consumer market.

# The Buyer's Black Box {#sect-00003}

It stands to reason that the hundreds of millions of people who make up
the global consumer market don't all buy the same products and services.
Why do certain people prefer different items than others? The answer
lies in the factors that influence consumer buying behavior. One model
of consumer buying behavior is what's known as the buyer's black box,
which is named as such because little is known about what goes on in the
human mind. It's also known as the stimulus-response model.

As illustrated in the model shown in [\#](#), consumer buying behavior
is based on stimuli coming from a variety of sources---from marketers in
terms of the 4Ps (product, price, promotion, and place), as well as from
environmental stimuli, such as economic factors, legal/political
factors, and technological and cultural factors.

These stimuli go into your "black box," which consists of two parts:
buyer characteristics such as beliefs and attitudes, motives,
perceptions, and values, and the buyer decision-making process, which is
covered later in the chapter. Your response is the outcome of the
thinking that takes place in that black box. What will you buy, where,
when, how often, and how much?

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# Types of Consumer Buying Behavior {#sect-00004}

Buying behavior is not influenced solely by the external environment.
It's also determined by your level of involvement in a purchase and the
amount of risk involved in the purchase. There are four types of
consumer buying behavior, as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

Complex buying behavior occurs when you make a significant or expensive
purchase, like buying a new car. Because you likely don't buy a new car
frequently, you're highly involved in the buying decision, and you
probably research different vehicles or talk with friends or family
before reaching your decision. By that time, you're likely convinced
that there's a significant difference among cars, and you've developed
your own unique set of criteria that helps you decide on your purchase.

Dissonance-reducing buying behavior occurs when you're highly involved
in a purchase but see little difference among brands. Let's say you're
replacing the flooring in your kitchen with ceramic tile---another
expensive, infrequent purchase. You might think that all brands of
ceramic tile in a certain price range are "about the same," so you might
shop around to see what's available, but you'll probably buy rather
quickly, perhaps as a result of a good price or availability. However,
after you've made your purchase, you may experience post-purchase
dissonance (also known as buyer's remorse) when you notice some
disadvantages of the tile you purchased or hear good things about a
brand you didn't purchase.

Habitual buying behavior has low involvement in the purchase decision
because it's often a repeat buy, and you don't perceive much brand
differentiation. Perhaps you usually buy a certain brand of organic
milk, but you don't have strong brand loyalty. If your regular brand
isn't available at the store or another brand is on sale, you'll
probably buy a different brand.

Variety-seeking buying behavior has the lowest customer involvement
because brand switching is your norm. You may not be unhappy with your
last purchase of tortilla chips, but you simply want to try something
new. It's a matter of brand switching for the sake of variety rather
than because of dissatisfaction with your previous purchase.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
The 4Ps and Consumer Behavior
:::

Watch this short, humorous 4Ps video as a way to help you remember the
concept. This video also includes several examples of target markets and
how a marketer might respond.

[The 4 Ps of The Marketing Mix Simplified](#)

Consumer behavior is an important marketing topic, and depending on the
marketing program at your institution, you may have the opportunity to
take a consumer behavior course and learn more about the topics covered
above. Studying consumer behavior is important in marketing because it
will teach you how to best know your customer, an integral aspect to
marketing a product or service. You can also watch this selfLearn-en
video to get a stronger grasp of consumer behavior.

[consumer behavior 101, learn consumer behavior basics, fundamentals,
and best practices](#)

As mentioned, environmental factors have an impact on consumer behavior.
Can you think of a recent environmental influence that has had a
significant impact? The coronavirus pandemic has probably been the most
influential in recent years, and for many reasons! We still have a lot
to learn about the impacts of the pandemic, and new information is being
released daily about changing human behavior and the impact on
marketing. For example, in this Google article, the author shares [a
cultural anthropologist's insights](#) for understanding consumer
behavior and how it relates to three core needs all people
experience---self-care, social connection, and identity---and how these
needs correlate to recent YouTube video trends. Learn about how
marketers can respond to this trend.

Continually trying to understand environmental influences will keep you
on the cutting edge and ahead of the competition. It's a great practice
to always be looking for the latest information so that you can shift
your strategies as needed. Bain & Company is an example of one company
that wanted to understand how the pandemic changed consumer behavior.
The company ran a survey in 2021 to better understand the impact of the
pandemic, and it found five trends from the data.

[How Covid-19 Has Changed Consumer Behavior](#)

A [survey from Accenture](#), one of the top-ranked consulting firms in
the world, found that the pandemic caused 50 percent of consumers to
evaluate their purpose and what's important to them. Read more about the
findings in this article.

Always be looking for information to be the best marketer you can be!
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00005}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# 

4Ps

the "marketing mix"---product, price, promotion, and place

buyer's black box

a model used in the study of the buying behavior of consumers

complex buying behavior

the consumer buying behavior that occurs when the consumer is highly
involved with the purchase and perceives significant differences between
brands

consumer buying behavior

the actions taken by consumers before buying a product or service

consumer market

a market where consumers purchase products and/or services for
consumption

cultural factors

a set of values or ideologies of a particular community or group of
individuals that include culture, subcultures, social class, and gender

dissonance-reducing buying behavior

any activity aimed at decreasing the tension or feelings of discomfort
and unease that accompany an unfamiliar purchase

habitual buying behavior

consumer buying decisions made out of "habit" and without much
deliberation or product comparison

variety-seeking buying behavior

the buying tendencies of consumers who do not have a high involvement
with a product when there are significant differences between brands
