m00003

656a95e4-fd14-434b-af42-5f1cd2be1e67

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

List and describe the cultural factors that influence consumer buying
behavior.

Explain the social factors that impact consumer buying behavior.

Discuss the personal factors that influence consumer buying behavior.

Describe the psychological factors that influence consumer buying
behavior.

Explain situational factors that impact consumer buying behavior.

# Cultural Factors That Influence Consumer Buying Behavior {#sect-00002}

Why people buy isn't always a straightforward question. Think about the
last time you bought a car, a bike, or other item. Why did you buy that
specific make and model? Was it because its sleek style made you feel
good about yourself? Perhaps you bought a particular brand because
someone in your family bought the same brand. These are just a couple of
examples of some of the factors that influence consumer buying behavior.
Let's examine some others.

Cultural factors comprise a set of values or ideologies of a particular
community or group of individuals. These can include culture,
subcultures, social class, and gender as outlined in [\#](#).

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Culture refers to the values, ideas, and attitudes that are learned and
shared among members of a group. Human behavior is largely learned. When
you were a child, you learned basic values, perceptions, wants, and
behaviors from your family and other external influences like the
schools and churches you attended. Consider how these values and
attitudes have shaped your buying behavior. For example, in a
traditional Hindu wedding in India, a bride may wear red lehenga to the
wedding, whereas Christian brides typically wear white. In India, widows
are expected to wear white, whereas widows in the United States and
other parts of the world generally wear more somber colors to a funeral.

A subculture is a group of people, such as environmentalists or
bodybuilders, who share a set of values. Ethnic and racial groups share
the language, food, and culture of their heritage. Other subcultures,
like the biker culture, which revolves around a dedication to
motorcycles, are united by shared experiences. The Amish subculture is
known for its conservative beliefs and reluctance to adapt to modern
technology. Think about what subculture(s) you may belong to and how
they influence your buying behavior. For example, hip-hop music has long
been associated with fashion, particularly sneakers. Run DMC's 1986 hit
"My Adidas" led to the first endorsement deal between a fashion brand
and a musical act, setting the stage for lucrative partnerships spanning
the decades since---Master P with Converse, Jay-Z and 50 Cent with
Reebok, Missy Elliott and Big Sean with Adidas, and Drake with Nike.

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
Failures and Inspirations
:::

Cultural factors play a major role in determining how best to market to
consumers. There are numerous examples of company efforts that failed
because they did not reflect an understanding of the culture in a
particular market. Watch this CNBC video on why Starbucks failed in
Australia and read this [article about how Coca-Cola and PepsiCo
failed](#) when they first moved into the Chinese market.

[Why Starbucks Failed In Australia](#)

Also check out this CNBC video about why 7-Eleven failed in Indonesia.

[Why 7-Eleven Failed In Indonesia](#)

Failures are always important because they come with learned knowledge,
and if you understand the WHY behind the failure, the learning can lead
to shifts in strategy and possible success. Read the [inspiring
story](#) behind Run DMC's revolutionary market deal with Adidas and how
it opened the door for current artists like 50 Cent, Jay-Z, and Puffy.

For more success stories, check out these [videos about numerous
companies that got it right](#). Examples include stories from Rihanna's
Fenty beauty line, Adobe's "When I See Black" ad, Bumble's "Find Me on
Bumble" campaign, and many more!
::::

Your social class is also an important influence on your buying
behavior. Sociologists base definitions of social class on several
different factors, including income, occupation, and education. While
there is disagreement on the number of social classes defined by income
in the United States, many sociologists suggest five social classes:
upper class, upper-middle class, lower-middle class, working class, and
the economically disadvantaged. Income is largely defined by disposable
income (the money you have left to spend or save after taxes are
deducted), but its influence goes beyond just dollars, euros, yen, etc.
For example, a lower-middle-class individual might focus primarily on
price when considering a product, whereas an upper-middle-class person
might consider product quality and features before price. However, you
also can be influenced by a social class to which you don't belong but
by which you want to be accepted. Have you ever spent money you really
didn't have on brand name running shoes or a designer purse because
that's what your friends have?

Finally, your gender plays an important role in your buying behavior.
People of different genders not only want different products as a result
of their upbringing and socialization, but they approach shopping itself
with different motives, perspectives, and considerations. While it's
always dangerous to stereotype, those who identify as male typically
follow a utilitarian, more logic-based approach when shopping. They want
a quick, effortless shopping experience. Those who identify as female,
on the other hand, make decisions on a more emotional level. Zappos
considers these different motives and provides different layouts on
their landing pages for different genders. While the "male" version
focuses on providing clear navigation by product categories, the
"female" version aims to sell on emotion.

:::: {#note-00005 .note}
::: title
Behind the Gender Differences
:::

Gender differences lead to different buying behaviors. Read this article
about [one such example, Birchbox](#), a hair care and skin care
subscription service. For even more information, check out this article
about the [reasons for the differences](#), which include purpose,
experience, brain make-up, and more. Interesting reads!

You can also watch this Gaby Barrios TED Talk. Barrios is a marketing
expert who speaks about how targeting consumers based on gender is bad
for business.

[Why gender-based marketing is bad for business \| Gaby Barrios](#)

This humorous video from The Checkout, a TV show about consumer affairs,
discusses gender marketing packaging decisions and their impact on your
wallet.

[GENDERED MARKETING \| The Checkout](#)

Another video about fashion brands focuses on how their parent companies
leverage gender strategies.

[Gender-based Marketing \| How fashion brands leverage their gender
strategy](#)
::::

:::: {#note-00006 .note}
::: title
Women in Marketing
:::

Let's look at gender from another angle---women advancing in marketing.
[Part of a series about jobs in marketing](#), this article examines
equity in the world of marketing. Findings include data on gender
balance and inequality, and guidance on ways to improve.

For an inspirational moment, be sure to read these heartwarming stories
about [six mothers of great marketers](#).
::::

# Social Factors That Influence Consumer Buying Behavior {#sect-00003}

Social factors are those factors that are prevalent in the society where
the consumer lives. Every society is composed of individuals who have
different preferences and behaviors, and these individuals influence the
personal preferences of others in the society. Humans are social
individuals, and the influences of people's family, reference groups,
and roles and status (refer to [\#](#)) have a huge impact on their
buying behavior.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

Let's first consider the influence of family. It is generally believed
that most people pass through two families: a family of orientation
(i.e., the family to which you were born or with whom you grew up) and a
family of procreation (the family formed through marriage or
cohabitation, including your spouse, partner, and/or children). Consider
first the family of orientation. When you were growing up, whether or
not you recognized it, you likely developed some degree of buying
behavior through watching adult members of your household and probably
tend to buy the same products or services as you grow older. Was your
father a die-hard Chevy driver? If so, the chances are good that you'll
probably at least consider buying a Chevy, too. Now consider the
influence that your spouse, partner, and/or children have on your buying
behavior. You may want that Chevy pickup because that's what your father
drove, but your spouse or partner may subtly (or perhaps not so subtly)
sway you toward a Chevy crossover SUV because it's more practical with
kids to transport to school, sports, and other activities.

Reference groups are those groups with which you like to be associated.
These can be formal groups, such as members of a country club, church,
or professional group, or informal groups of friends or acquaintances.
These groups serve as role models and inspirations, and they influence
what types of products you buy and which brands you choose. Reference
groups are characterized by having opinion leaders---people who
influence others. These opinion leaders aren't necessarily higher-income
or better educated, but others view them as having more expertise in a
particular area. For example, a teenage girl may look to the opinion
leader in her reference group of friends for fashion guidance, or a
college student might aspire to getting an advanced degree from the same
university as an admired professor. Social media influencers also play a
role here. Consider the influence that celebrities like Kendall Jenner
(with more than 217 million Instagram followers) or Leo Messi (with over
310 million Instagram followers) have on individuals.

All people assume different roles and status depending upon the groups,
clubs, family, or organizations to which they belong. For example, a
working mother who is taking classes at the local community college
assumes three roles at varying times---that of an employee, a mother,
and a student. Her buying decisions will be influenced by each of these
roles at different times. When she is shopping for clothing, her
purchases may be influenced by any or all of these roles---professional
attire for the office, casual clothes for classes, or yoga pants for
home.

# Personal Factors That Impact Consumer Buying Behavior {#sect-00004}

Personal factors, such as your occupation, age and life cycle stage,
economic situation, lifestyle, and personality and self-concept also
play a major role in your buying behavior (refer to [\#](#)). Let's
examine each of these in more detail.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

Age is a major factor that influences buying behavior because consumer
needs and wants change with age. Your buying habits as a teenager or
twentysomething are likely to be vastly different from your buying
habits in middle age and beyond. Consider the four generational cohorts
currently comprising the consumer market:

Baby boomers

(born between 1946 and 1964) are currently in their 60s and 70s. This
generational cohort is approximately 70 million people strong in the
United States and accounts for \$2.6 trillion in buying power,

:::: {#note-00009 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

so you can imagine its impact on the consumer market. What types of
products would you expect baby boomers to buy? Key categories for this
group of buyers include pharmacy and health care products, household
goods and appliances, wine, books (both digital and physical),
cosmetics, and skin care products.

:::: {#note-00010 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Generation X

(born between 1965 and 1979/80) are currently in their 40s and 50s. This
cohort is approximately 65 million strong

:::: {#note-00011 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

and generally has more spending power than younger generational cohorts
because they're at or reaching the peak of their careers, and many Gen
Xers are dual-income families.

:::: {#note-00012 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

This makes them an optimal target for higher-end brands and
convenience-related goods, like made-to-order or prepared meals from the
grocery store.

Generation Y

, also known as

Millennials

, (born between 1981 and 1994/96) are currently in their 20s and 30s.
This cohort is the largest generation group in the United States, with
an estimated population of 72 million.

:::: {#note-00013 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

One interesting aspect of Millennial buying is that they shop
sustainably. They shop for brands that produce items with natural
ingredients and ethical production lines and sustainable goods in every
sector, such as food, household cleaning products, linens, and clothes.

:::: {#note-00014 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Generation Z

, also known as

Zoomers

, (born between 1997 and 2012) are currently in their teens to early
20s, and they are just starting to have an economic impact on the
consumer market. Although over 67 million strong,

:::: {#note-00015 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

many Zoomers are still in school and living with their parents, and
their discretionary spending is limited.

:::: {#note-00016 .note}
::: title
Marketing to the Ages
:::

Knowing how to speak to your target market is critical. Knowing how to
frame your message to a Baby Boomer versus a Gen Xer is what makes
marketers successful. Want to know how to speak to each group? Check out
these articles about [marketing to different age demographics](#) and
[generational marketing](#).

Learn from real-world examples of how [age-agnostic marketing](#) can
work.

Have you ever seen a commercial or advertisement that pulls on your
heartstrings because it gets you reminiscing? Nostalgia is an impactful
tool in marketing because it gives a feeling of meaning and comfort.
Check out this online blog to learn more about the [impact of
nostalgia](#) in marketing.
::::

Likewise, your life cycle stage has a major influence on your buying
habits. Consider the different buying choices you would make as a single
person who is renting an apartment in an urban area versus the choices
you would make as a homeowner in the suburbs with children. It should be
noted, though, that age and life cycle stage can often be poor
predictors of buying behavior. For example, some 40-year-olds are just
starting their families, while others are sending their kids off to
college. Still other 40-year-olds are single (or single again). Some
70-year-olds may fit the stereotype of a retired person with a fixed
income; others are still active or perhaps still working, with plenty of
disposable income.

Your economic situation (income) is a huge influence on your buying
behavior. Higher income typically means higher disposable income, and
that disposable income gives consumers more opportunity to spend on
high-end products. Conversely, lower-income and middle-income consumers
spend most of their income on basic needs such as groceries and
clothing.

Your occupation is also a significant factor in your buying behavior
because you tend to purchase things that are appropriate to your
profession. For instance, a blue-collar worker is less likely to buy
professional attire like business suits, whereas attorneys, accountants,
and other white-collar workers may favor suits or business casual work
clothes. There are even companies that specialize in work clothes for
certain types of workers, such as health care professionals who buy
scrubs or construction workers who buy steel-toed boots.

Your lifestyle reflects your attitudes and values. What do you consider
to be your lifestyle? Do you strive to live an active, healthy
lifestyle? If so, your purchasing decisions may focus on healthier food
alternatives instead of fast food. Do you consider yourself to be a
soccer parent? You may (perhaps reluctantly) forgo that sports car for a
minivan in order to transport your kids to youth sporting events or
other activities.

Your personality and self-concept are also important factors influencing
your buying behavior. Personality is the characteristic patterns of
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors that make a person unique. It's
believed that personality arises from within the individual and remains
fairly consistent throughout life. Some examples of the many personality
traits people might have include things like self-confidence,
individualism, extroversion, introversion, aggression, or
competitiveness. Your personality greatly influences what you buy as
well as when and how you use or consume products and services.

Perhaps even more importantly, as consumers, people tend to buy not only
products they need but also those products or services that they
perceive as being consistent with their "self-concept." In other words,
they generally want the products they buy to match or blend in with who
they think they are.

# Psychological Factors That Influence Consumer Buying Behavior {#sect-00005}

Your buying choices are further influenced by several major
psychological factors, including motivation, perception, learning,
feelings, beliefs, and attitudes (refer to [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

Let's first consider how motivation affects your buying behavior.
Motivation is the process that initiates, guides, and maintains
goal-oriented behaviors. It's the driving force behind your actions. One
of the most widely known motivation theories is Maslow's hierarchy of
needs (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00005">

</figure>

Abraham Maslow asserted that all individuals have five needs, arranged
from the most basic lower-level deficiency needs to the highest-level
growth needs. As [\#](#) shows, physiological needs are at the most
basic level and include things like adequate food, water, and shelter.
Think about how marketers may try to appeal to consumers based on
physiological needs. For example, Snickers ran a very successful ad
campaign based on the slogan "You're not you when you're hungry."

The second level is safety and security, the need to be safe from
physical and psychological harm. Once again, consider just a few
successful marketing campaigns that have focused on safety---"You're in
Good Hands with Allstate" and Lysol's "Practice Healthy Habits" campaign
with its tagline "What It Takes to Protect."

The third level is belonging, or social needs. This level includes
things like the need for emotional attachments, friendship, love, or
belonging to community or church groups.

Esteem, the fourth level, includes such needs as recognition from
others, taking pride in your education or work, awards, and/or prestige.

The highest level is self-actualization, which involves self-development
and seeking challenges. For example, Nike's "Find Your Greatness"
campaign was intended to spark greatness in ordinary people, not just
professional athletes.

:::: {#note-00019 .note}
::: title
Examples of Maslow's Five Needs
:::

Check out this Snickers\' "You're not you when you're hungry"
commercial, which appeals to basic human physiological needs.

[Snickers \'You\'re Not You When You\'re Hungry\' TVC - AdNews](#)

This Lysol "What It Takes to Protect" commercial appeals to the human
needs for safety and security.

[Lysol Disinfectant Spray - What It Takes To Protect](#)

Consider this public service announcement (PSA) from the Ad Council that
is dedicated to fostering a more welcoming nation where everyone can
belong. How does it appeal to the human need for community and
belonging?

[Shared Table :30 \| Belonging Begins With Us](#)

One awesome esteem level example to check out is this one from Dove.
Dove launched a [campaign to boost female self-esteem](#) and to
celebrate female beauty in all shapes and sizes. The company also
created "confidence-boosting boards" on Pinterest. The boards include
self-esteem activities so girls and their parents can share words of
encouragement.

Check out one of Nike's commercials from the "Find Your Greatness"
campaign. How does it appeal to the human need for self-actualization?

[Fear Not \| Nike: Find Your Greatness](#)
::::

Maslow asserted that people strive to satisfy their most basic needs
before directing their behavior toward satisfying higher-level needs, so
it stands to reason that consumer buying behavior would follow this
model. For example, you'd first have to fulfill your needs for food and
shelter before you might consider putting money away for retirement or
purchasing a home security system.

:::: {#note-00024 .note}
::: title
Maslow and Marketing
:::

Understanding Maslow's hierarchy of needs will help you be an effective
and impressive marketer. You're going to see this model in many of your
business courses, not just marketing, so take the time to learn about
it. Check out this brief video that may help you understand how to use
Maslow's hierarchy of needs in marketing. Learn about why Maslow's
hierarchy of needs matters.

[How to use Maslow\'s Hierarchy of Needs in Marketing!](#)
::::

Perception is the way in which people identify, organize, and interpret
sensory information. It's another variable in consumer buying behavior
because the perceptions you have about a business or its products or
services have a dramatic effect on your buying behavior. What makes
perception even more complex is that consumers can form different
perceptions of the same stimulus because of three perceptual processes:
selective attention, selective distortion, and selective retention.
Let's take a closer look.

Every day, you're bombarded with marketing messages from TV commercials,
magazine and newspaper ads, billboards, and social media ads. As of
2021, it was estimated that the average person encounters between 6,000
and 10,000 ads every single day. It stands to reason that you can't
possibly pay attention to all of the competing stimuli surrounding you,
so you'll pay attention to only those stimuli that you consider relevant
to your wants and needs at the time and screen out the rest. That's the
process known as selective attention.

:::: {#note-00026 .note}
::: title
When Bombarding Backfires
:::

Bombarding consumers with marketing messages can cause more harm than
good. According to this [article from Marketing Dive](#), bombarding
people with ads would negatively impact a brand. This [article from the
Advertising Association](#) shares data that indicates bombardment and
intrusiveness negatively impact perceptions of advertising.

How can you combat the issue? [Quantcast outlines](#) ways to avoid ad
bombardment.
::::

:::: {#note-00027 .note}
::: title
It's about Ability
:::

Your personal brand will be a significant factor when it comes to
finding a job. What does your personal brand say today? What is your
marketing story? Is it what you want it to be? If not, what will you do
to change it? The end-of-chapter content includes various ways to
explore your personal brand to help you prepare for your job search.

How are you going to stand out among other candidates? What can you do
with your résumé? According to Jason Shen's TED Talk, you should
highlight your abilities and not your experience. He speaks to potential
and how you can make yourself more attractive to potential employers by
telling a story in a compelling way.

[Looking for a job? Highlight your ability, not your experience \| Jason
Shen](#)

According to the American Marketing Association (AMA), you need to know
yourself well. Self-knowledge will help you know the kind of work
environment you perform best in and what kind of work you enjoy most.
The AMA is a great place to learn how to [stand out as a marketing job
applicant](#), target companies, prepare your best résumé, and have a
successful interview.

Check out these sources on how to stand out and ways you can beat the
competition:

Freemanleonard

: "How Marketers and Creatives Can Stand Out in Today's Competitive Job
Market"

Recruiter.com

: "13 Tried-and-True Creative Tactics Candidates Have Used to Stand Out
in Interviews"

Acadium

: "Launch Your Digital Marketing Career: How to Stand Out as a
Candidate"

Indeed

: "8 Marketing Interview Questions to Expect"

Entrepreneur

: "Building Your Brand Is How You Will Stand Out When Applying for a
Job"

Smart Insights

: "7 Tactics to Help You Stand Out as a Marketer and Get Better Jobs"

24 Seven

: "10 Tips to Ace Your Next Marketing Job Interview"

If you want to go the extra mile in making yourself stand out, reach out
to current marketers and ask them questions. You can find hundreds, even
thousands, of current marketers on LinkedIn. Try targeting people from
companies you're interested in or would like to learn more about. Look
for specific people who are doing jobs that interest you. Going to an
interview armed with information is incredibly powerful and will speak
volumes to your interviewer. Be sure to find a way to work your
completed research into the interview conversation because it will speak
to your drive, curiosity, and ambition---all traits every interviewer
wants to hear about. This will also be another way you can stand out
from others interviewing for the job. Questions you could ask current
marketers in preparation for an interview include (but by no means are
limited to):

What about you stood out in your interview process that made your
current company hire you?

Can you tell me about examples of people you've interviewed and why they
stood out to you?

How have candidates stood out when they spoke about their abilities in a
job interview scenario?

What are your thoughts on candidates sharing a college project with you
as a way to demonstrate abilities?

What advice do you have for me?

Be creative with your questions! Look online for other questions you
could ask. Have fun!
::::

Even the stimuli that people notice don't always come across in the way
in which the marketers intended. Selective distortion is the tendency of
people to interpret information in a way that fits their preconceived
notions. This was demonstrated years ago when PepsiCo launched its Pepsi
Challenge blind taste test commercials. Participants were presented with
two colas in unmarked plastic cups and asked to taste both colas and
choose the one they liked better. Then the tester would lift a small
screen to reveal the brand the participants preferred. In TV commercials
that aired for years, Pepsi showed the stunned reactions of loyal
Coca-Cola drinkers who had chosen Pepsi over Coke in the test. One
grandmother in a commercial said, "I can't believe it. I've never had a
Pepsi in my life, but it must be better!"

People also tend to forget much of what they learn and to retain
information that supports their preconceived attitudes and beliefs.
That's the power of selective retention, a bias by which you're more
likely to remember messages that are closely related to your interests,
values, and beliefs rather than those that are contrary to those values
and beliefs.

Beliefs, feelings, and attitudes also play an important role in consumer
buying behavior. Beliefs are consumer perceptions of how a product or
brand performs relative to different attributes. These beliefs are
generally formed through personal experience, advertising, and
conversations with others, and they play a vital role because they can
be either positive or negative. You can even hold both positive and
negative beliefs about the same thing. For example, you may believe that
coffee is good for you because it helps you focus and stay alert, but
you may also worry about the effect of coffee on your health and the way
it stains your teeth. Human beliefs aren't always accurate and can
change according to the situation.

Consumer attitudes are a composite of a consumer's beliefs, feelings,
and behavioral intentions toward a product or service (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00006">

</figure>

We've already talked about beliefs, so let's focus for a moment on
affect, or feeling. Consumers often have certain feelings toward brands,
products, or services. Sometimes these feelings are based on people's
beliefs, such as a vegetarian who can't stand the thought of eating a
hamburger, but you may also have feelings that are relatively
independent of your beliefs. For example, someone who has strong
environmentalist beliefs may object to clearing forests to make way for
a housing development but may have positive feelings toward Christmas
trees because they subconsciously associate these trees with the
experience that they had at Christmas as a child.

The behavioral intention aspect of an attitude is what you as a consumer
plan to do---buy the brand or not buy the brand. As with affect, this is
sometimes a logical consequence of your beliefs but may sometimes
reflect other circumstances. Consider a consumer who doesn't
particularly like a restaurant but will go there because it's an
after-class gathering spot with her friends.

Learning is still another important factor in consumer buying behavior.
The fact is that consumer behavior is learned, and much of what you buy
is based on your previous experiences with particular brands. This is
commonly known as the Law of Effect, which asserts that, if an action is
followed by a pleasant consequence, you're likely to repeat it; if the
action is followed by an unpleasant consequence, you're less likely to
repeat it. For example, let's say you buy an Apple iPhone. If your
experience with the iPhone is positive, you'll probably be more inclined
to buy another Apple product when you're looking for a tablet or
wearable. On the other hand, if you've had a not-so-positive experience
with your iPhone, you're likely to look at other brands when considering
purchasing other devices.

:::: {#note-00030 .note}
::: title
Lessons in Psychology
:::

Psychology is a big part of marketing. Insight into your customers'
thinking will allow you to create marketing messages and stories that
better speak to their needs. Learning, the process where customers
acquire information they can apply to future purchases, is a
foundational concept in marketing. Learn about the various types of
learning and how they can impact marketing strategies from this [Forbes
article](#).
::::

# Situational Factors That Impact Consumer Buying Behavior {#sect-00006}

Situational factors influencing consumers are external (refer to
[\#](#)). These factors play an important role in how consumers
experience a product and how these consumers' opinions are formed.

<figure id="fig-00007">

</figure>

Environmental factors such as music, lighting, ambient noise, and even
smells can either discourage or encourage a consumer's purchase
decision. For example, researchers conducted a study on the effect of
lighting on consumer purchases in a grocery store. They lit half the
store with traditional fluorescent lighting and the other half of the
building with LED lighting. Researchers conducted the study over 21
weeks and discovered that consumers bought 25 percent more products on
the LED-lit side of the store.

Spatial factors also play a role. The way a product is displayed may
make it seem desirable, but a crowded store or a long line at the cash
register can suddenly make that same product seem less desirable. Think
about it: Have you ever seen a long line to check out at the cash
register and put the product you intended to buy back on the shelf
because it simply wasn't worth it to waste your time standing in line?

The Marketing in Practice feature box shows how sound and smell can
affect consumers.

:::: {#note-00032 .note}
::: title
Abercrombie & Fitch
:::

<figure id="fig-00008">

</figure>

As consumers, people usually don't think twice about what a store smells
or sounds like, the way it makes them feel or think, or what it makes
them do. But Abercrombie & Fitch (A&F) thinks about it a lot (see
[\#](#)).

The company has its own line of men's fragrances called "Fierce," which
is sprayed liberally in stores to give off what the company describes as
a "lifestyle . . . packed with confidence and a bold, masculine
attitude." A&F knows who it wants in its stores, and by associating its
fragrance with its stores, it creates a self-fulfilling prophecy for its
male clientele who, by wanting to smell like A&F, will be like the
models and sales staff in the store.

A&F also plays loud club music throughout its stores, attracting young
people who can withstand loud music longer, while older customers may
run from it. It's just another way that A&F is enabling its stores to
maintain a more youthful clientele and a "fresher" image.

Watch this video on Abercrombie & Fitch's brand transformation for
further insight on how A&F has positioned its retail brand Hollister as
a global iconic teen brand and modernized the A&F brand to focus on
young millennial consumers.

[Abercrombie & Fitch CEO on the brand\'s transformation](#)
::::

The social situation of shopping is another situational factor. Did you
know that you're more likely to stop to look at certain products when
you're in the company of a friend as opposed to a parent? The social
aspect can even alter the price you're willing to pay. You might be more
inclined to purchase a more expensive product when you're with a
colleague or potential partner than you would if you're with a friend or
spouse.

The goal of your shopping trip is yet another situational factor. If you
go to a store to look for a birthday present for your mother, your
purpose is totally different than if you're casually shopping for a new
pair of shoes. The reason for shopping dictates the kinds of products
customers are willing to interact with at that time and may cause them
to bypass certain products they would normally interact with on another
shopping trip. This is even true at the grocery store. You'll interact
with products differently if you're on your weekly shopping trip versus
simply going into the store because you're out of milk.

Much like the purpose of your shopping trip, timing also influences your
consumer behavior. If you're in a rush because it's Christmas Eve and
you haven't bought a present for your best friend yet, you'll interact
with fewer products than if you have hours to shop. Even if two people
are looking for the same type of product, the one in a rush will
probably end up with the most accessible product, whereas the leisurely
consumer has time to weigh the price and quality of offerings.

Finally, your mood influences your buying behavior. Someone who is
feeling sad or stressed interacts differently with products than a
happy, relaxed shopper. The same can be said for someone who's fatigued
versus someone who's full of energy.

:::: {#note-00035 .note}
::: title
Situational Factors
:::

There are many examples where companies use situational factors in their
marketing approaches. Here are several online sites and specific
articles:

Westin and the White Tea Signature Scent

The Aroma Trace

: "Best Examples of Olfactory Marketing in Companies"

Sync Originals

: "10 Brands That Made Music Part of Their Marketing DNA"

Omnify

: "8 Simple Lighting Techniques That Boost Retail Sales"

Science News

: "Does Background Noise Make Consumers Buy More Innovative Products?"

Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science

: "Sounds Like a Healthy Retail Atmosphere Strategy: Effects of Ambient
Music and Background Noise on Food Sales"
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00007}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00008}

:::: {#rf-002 .note}
::: title
:::

2\.

MSG Management Study Guide. (n.d.), accessed August 4, 2021,
https://www.managementstudyguide.com/cultural-factors-affecting-consumer-behaviour.htm.
::::

:::: {#rf-003 .note}
::: title
:::

3\.

"What Is Social Class?" (n.d.), accessed March 7, 2022,
https://udel.edu/\~cmarks/What%20is%20social%20class.htm.
::::

:::: {#rf-004 .note}
::: title
:::

4\.

Editor, "Women vs. Men---Gender Differences in Purchase Decision
Making," zoovu Blog (July 16, 2019), accessed September 19, 2021,
https://zoovu.com/blog/women-vs-men-gender-differences-in-purchase-decision-making/.
::::

:::: {#rf-005 .note}
::: title
:::

5\.

Kendall (@kendalljenner) • Instagram photos and videos (n.d.), accessed
March 7, 2022, https://www.instagram.com/kendalljenner/.
::::

:::: {#rf-006 .note}
::: title
:::

6\.

Leo Messi (@leomessi) • Instagram photos and videos (n.d.), accessed
March 7, 2022, https://www.instagram.com/leomessi/.
::::

:::: {#rf-007 .note}
::: title
:::

7\.

Statista Research Department, "US Population by Generation 2019,"
Statista (September 19, 2021), accessed March 7, 2022,
https://www.statista.com/statistics/797321/us-population-by-generation/.
::::

:::: {#rf-008 .note}
::: title
:::

8\.

"The Online Shopping Habits of Today's Baby Boomers," SkuLocal (November
12, 2018), accessed June 13, 2022,
https://www.skulocal.com/insights/the-online-shopping-habits-of-todays-baby-boomers/.
::::

:::: {#rf-009 .note}
::: title
:::

9\.

Statista Research Department, "US Population by Generation 2019,"
Statista (September 19, 2021).
::::

:::: {#rf-010 .note}
::: title
:::

10\.

Consumer Insight: Generation X-fona

. (n.d.), accessed March 7, 2022, https://www.fona.com/wp
content/uploads/2019/03/0319-FONA-Consumer-Insight_Gen-X.pdf.
::::

:::: {#rf-011 .note}
::: title
:::

11\.

Statista Research Department, "US Population by Generation 2019,"
Statista (September 19, 2021), accessed March 7, 2022,
https://www.statista.com/statistics/797321/us-population-by-generation/.
::::

:::: {#rf-012 .note}
::: title
:::

12\.

Shannon Ciricillo, "What Are Millennials Buying: The Gen Y Shopping
Guide, The Hub (July 7, 2019), accessed August 4, 2021,
https://thehhub.com/2019/07/07/what-are-millennials-buying-the-gen-y-shopping-guide/.
::::

:::: {#rf-013 .note}
::: title
:::

13\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-014 .note}
::: title
:::

14\.

Kendra Cherry, "What Is Personality?" verywellmind, accessed August 4,
2021, https://www.verywellmind.com/what-is-personality-2795416.
::::

:::: {#rf-015 .note}
::: title
:::

15\.

Sallie B. Middlebrook, "Personality and Related Characteristics That
Affect Consumer Buying Behavior," ToughNickel (January 8, 2013),
accessed March 7, 2022,
https://toughnickel.com/industries/Buyer-Characteristics-and-Consumer-Behavior.
::::

:::: {#rf-016 .note}
::: title
:::

16\.

Sam Carr, "How Many Ads Do We See A Day? 2021 Daily Ad Exposure
Revealed!" PPC Project (May 12, 2021), accessed August 4, 2021,
https://ppcprotect.com/how-many-ads-do-we-see-a-day/.
::::

:::: {#rf-017 .note}
::: title
:::

17\.

Mithun Sridharan, "Selective Perception Marketing: How Can Big Data
Help?" Think Insights (March 7, 2022), accessed June 13, 2022,
https://thinkinsights.net/digital/selective-perception-marketing-big-data/.
::::

:::: {#rf-018 .note}
::: title
:::

18\.

Lars Perner, "Consumer Behavior: Attitudes," University of Southern
California Marshall (n.d.), accessed March 7, 2022,
https://www.consumerpsychologist.com/cb_Attitudes.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-019 .note}
::: title
:::

19\.

"How Grocery Store Lighting Impacts Customer Decisions," Stratus (May
13, 2021), accessed September 28, 2021,
https://www.stratusunlimited.com/news/how-grocery-store-lighting-impacts-customer-decisions/.
::::

:::: {#rf-020 .note}
::: title
:::

20\.

Humayun Khan, "How Retailers Manipulate Sight, Smell, and Sound to
Trigger Purchase Behavior in Consumers,"

Shopify

Retail Blog (April 25, 2016), accessed June 13, 2022,
https://www.shopify.com/retail/119926083-how-retailers-manipulate-sight-smell-and-sound-to-trigger-purchase-behavior-in-consumers.
::::

:::: {#rf-021 .note}
::: title
:::

21\.

Dana Severson, "Theories of Situational Factors That Influence
Customers," Chron. (November 21, 2017), accessed August 4, 2021,
https://smallbusiness.chron.com/theories-situational-factors-influence-customers-78765.html.
::::

# 

attitudes

a learned set of emotions, beliefs, and behaviors developed toward a
particular brand, object, person, thing, or event

beliefs

ideas that a person holds as being true

culture

the pattern of learned and shared behavior and beliefs of a particular
social, ethnic, or age group

economic situation

a measure of a consumer's income and financial situation

environmental factors

factors such as music, lighting, ambient noise, and smell that can
either discourage or encourage a consumer's purchase decision

family

a group of persons united by ties of marriage, blood, or adoption, or
those who live in the same household

gender

the socially constructed roles, behaviors, and norms of individuals,
which vary between societies and over time

learning

the acquisition of knowledge or skills through experience, study, or
being taught

life cycle stages

various stages in a human's life, including fetus, baby, childhood,
adolescence, adulthood, and elderly

lifestyle

the habits, attitudes, tastes, moral standards, economic level, etc.
that together constitute the mode of living for an individual or group

Maslow's hierarchy of needs

a theory of motivation by Abraham Maslow which states that five
categories of human needs dictate an individual's behavior

motivation

the process that initiates, guides, and maintains goal-oriented
behaviors

occupation

an activity or task with which one occupies oneself, usually the
productive activity, service, trade, or craft for which one is regularly
paid

perception

the manner in which sensory information is organized, interpreted, and
consciously experienced

personality

the combination of characteristics or qualities that form an
individual's distinctive character

product differentiation

a marketing strategy in which a brand identifies the one thing that
makes it genuinely different from competitors

reference groups

groups that consumers compare themselves to or associate with

roles

the set of norms, values, behaviors, and personality characteristics
attached to a status

selective attention

the process of directing one's awareness to relevant stimuli while
ignoring irrelevant stimuli in the environment

selective distortion

a tendency of people to interpret information in a manner that supports
what they already believe

selective retention

the tendency of people to retain only part of the information to which
they are exposed

social class

a group of people within a society that possesses the same or similar
socioeconomic status

social factors

factors that are prevalent in the society where a consumer lives

status

the relative social, professional, or other standing of an individual

subculture

a cultural group within a larger culture, often having beliefs or
interests at variance with those in the larger culture
