m00004

bfb84abd-4471-4dbc-98ed-0b8ca1d8eae3

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Explain the first stage in the consumer purchasing decision process.

Summarize the second stage in the consumer purchasing decision process.

Describe the third stage in the consumer purchasing decision process.

Discuss the fourth stage in the consumer purchasing decision process.

Explain the fifth and final stage in the consumer purchasing decision
process.

# Consumer Decision Process {#sect-00008}

This chapter has examined many of the factors that influence consumer
buying behavior, but behind the visible act of making a purchase lies an
important decision process that takes place before, during, and after
the purchase of a product or service. [\#](#) shows the five stages of
the consumer decision process.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

A buyer passes through five stages of the consumer decision process when
making choices about which products or services to buy. Let's examine
each, starting at the beginning.

# Stage 1: Need Recognition {#sect-00002}

The buying process starts when you sense a difference between your
actual state and your desired state. This is referred to as problem
awareness or need recognition. You might become aware of a need through
internal stimuli (such as feeling hungry or thirsty when you're on a
long road trip) or external stimuli (such as passing a bakery and
smelling the wonderful aroma of cookies baking).

Sometimes recognizing the problem or need is easy. You've run out of
toilet paper or milk. But other times recognizing the problem or issue
is more complicated. For example, think about this first stage in terms
of your decision to enroll in college. What was the stimulus that
triggered your interest in attending college? Are you a working adult
who has recognized that upward advancement in your company won't happen
without possessing a college degree? Have you long aspired to be an
entrepreneur, and you wanted to get some business and marketing courses
under your belt so that you're better prepared for the challenges of
entrepreneurship? Perhaps a career in marketing has been on your
internal radar since high school, and you've decided to take the plunge
and get your degree in marketing. Or perhaps, after graduating from high
school, your parents gave you an ultimatum---either find a job or enroll
in college.

# Stage 2: Information Search {#sect-00003}

Now that you've identified the problem or need, you'll be inclined to
search for more information. There are two different search states. The
milder search state is called "heightened attention," in which you
become more receptive to information about the product or service. The
stronger search state is called "active information search," in which
you might do some research about the product or service on the Internet
(referred to as an internal search), ask friends and/or family members
their opinions (what's known as an external search), or even visit
stores to view and touch the product (called an experiential search).

Keep in mind, of course, that not all needs/problems identified in Stage
1 will require this second stage. If you've run out of bread or toilet
paper, you're probably not going to do an information search; rather,
you'll just go to the store to buy what you need, and your information
search may be as simple as checking prices at the grocery store to see
if your favorite brand is available or another brand is on sale.
However, purchase decisions of more consequence will usually trigger an
information search of some type.

Again, consider the process you went through in deciding which college
to attend. What sources of information did you use to find out about the
colleges or universities you considered attending? Did you look at their
websites, talk with friends or family who attended that school, or
perhaps even visit the campus and meet with an admissions counselor?

# Stage 3: Evaluation of Alternatives {#sect-00004}

Consumers are said to view a product or service as a "bundle of product
attributes," and you evaluate several attributes of a product or service
in reaching your purchase decision. For example, if you're buying a
smartphone, you'll consider factors such as battery life, speed, storage
capacity, or price. If you're booking a hotel, you'll probably consider
its location, cleanliness, free Wi-Fi, whether it has a free breakfast
in the morning or a pool, and of course price.

What bundle of attributes did you use when evaluating your college
alternatives? You may have considered factors such as location, size of
the campus, whether the school had the program of study you wanted, if
it had online learning, and cost.

# Stage 4: Purchase Decision {#sect-00005}

This stage involves actually reaching a decision on the purchase of the
product or service. One way people navigate all the information,
evaluations, and choices in their purchase decision is to use
heuristics---mental shortcuts or "rules of thumb." Heuristics are types
of preexisting value judgments that people use to make decisions.

For example, do you believe that the more expensive product is always of
higher quality than the lower-priced product? That's known as the price
= quality heuristic. Brand loyalty is another heuristic people use in
reaching their purchase decisions. For example, do you eat cereal? Do
you always buy the same brand, or do you buy whatever's on sale or a
brand for which you have a coupon? Country of origin is still another
heuristic. Given a choice, do you prefer to buy products made in the
United States versus products made in other countries?

How did you make your purchase decision to enroll in your college or
university? What heuristics did you use?

# Stage 5: Post-Purchase Evaluation {#sect-00006}

After purchasing the product or service, you'll experience either
satisfaction or dissatisfaction. You may have second thoughts after
making a purchase decision, and these doubts lead to cognitive
dissonance, or buyer's remorse---tension caused by uncertainty about the
correctness of your decision. This may lead you to search for additional
information to confirm the wisdom of your decision in order to reduce
that tension.

What determines if a consumer is very satisfied, somewhat satisfied, or
dissatisfied with his or her purchase? Satisfaction is a function of the
closeness between the buyer's expectations and the product's perceived
performance. If the product's performance falls short of expectations,
you'll be dissatisfied. If the product's performance meets your
expectations, you'll be satisfied, and if the product's performance
exceeds your expectations, you'll be very satisfied.

Think about the purchase decision you made when you decided to enroll in
your college or university. Are you very satisfied, satisfied, or
dissatisfied with your decision? Refer to [\#](#) for a summary of the
five stages of the consumer decision process.

  Stage                                 Description
  ------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Stage 1: Need Recognition             The buying process actually starts when you sense a difference between your actual state and your desired state. This is referred to as problem awareness or need recognition. You might become aware of the need through internal stimuli (such as feeling hungry or thirsty when you're on a long road trip) or external stimuli (such as passing a bakery and smelling the wonderful aroma of cookies baking).
  Stage 2: Information Search           Once the problem of need is identified, the next step is to search for more information that will help you make a choice. There are two different search states---heightened attention and active information search.
  Stage 3: Evaluation of Alternatives   This is the stage in the process where you'll evaluate several attributes of the product or service in making a decision on a purchase.
  Stage 4: Purchase Decision            This stage involves actually reaching a decision on the purchase of the product or service.
  Stage 5: Post-Purchase Evaluation     After purchasing the product or service, you'll now experience either satisfaction or dissatisfaction. You may have second thoughts after making the purchase decision, and these doubts lead to cognitive dissonance, or buyer's remorse. This may lead you to search for additional information to confirm the wisdom of your decision in order to reduce that tension.

  : Five Stages of the Consumer Decision Process {#table-00001}

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
You Are Also a Consumer
:::

Learn about the five stages of the consumer decision process in this
video from Open Up (Upatras) Entrepreneurship and this [article from
Business Study Notes](#).

[Understanding consumer decision making process](#)

GWI, a company that researches global consumer thinking, published its
[2022 consumer trends report](#), which showed that consumers' needs and
priorities have shifted. Read the report and see if you find the same
results for yourself. Have your priorities and needs changed since the
pandemic hit? What are the other factors influencing your needs
assessment?

Several tools can help you with a personal needs assessment. Practice
your marketing skills on yourself by trying this [needs assessment
worksheet](#). This personal awareness will help you in many ways,
including finding the right job that best fits your interests and
abilities. Also take a few assessments and compare your results to
better identify jobs worth learning more about. There are several free
career aptitude tests to try:

123 Career Test

Interest Assessment

Work Values Matcher

A Personality Color Test

In addition to career aptitude tests, personality tests assess your
skill level and your ability to succeed in a career. Try a few of these:

Typology Central Jung Personality Test

Myers-Briggs Type Indicator

The Balance Careers site also provides [a wealth of resources](#) on
additional aptitude, personality, talent, and preemployment tests. It's
worth your time to dive into this information to help you identify which
career might be your best fit.
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00007}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# 

cognitive dissonance

the mental conflict that occurs when a person's behaviors and beliefs do
not align; also referred to as buyer's remorse

consumer decision process

the process through which consumers become aware of and identify their
needs, collect information on how to best solve those needs, evaluate
alternative options, make a purchasing decision, and evaluate their
purchase

heuristics

mental shortcuts that allow people to solve problems and make judgments
quickly and efficiently
