m00005

f934773c-9e72-4130-9952-9d7beb84f5a8

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Describe ethical issues related to consumer buying behavior.

Identify the characteristics of an ethical consumer.

# Ethical Issues in Consumer Buying Behavior {#sect-00002}

All purchase behavior is in some sense ethical, involving moral
judgment. For example, a consumer is concerned about the abuse of human
rights in a foreign country, so corporate involvement in that country
may be a factor in the consumer's purchasing decisions. Similarly,
consumers concerned about animal rights may consider whether a cosmetic
product has been tested on animals. For example, in one 2017 survey, 32
percent of US cosmetics consumers reported that they would "very likely"
stop purchasing their favorite brand if the manufacturer tested on
animals.

## Ethical Consumerism {#sect-00003}

Economic theory suggests that consumers seek to maximize utility (the
total satisfaction received from consuming a product or service) at the
lowest cost possible, so it follows that firms that have higher costs of
production will be driven out of the market. Recently, more and more
firms have started using "ethical" labels as a means of product
differentiation, a marketing strategy in which a brand identifies the
one thing that makes it genuinely different from competitors and then
leverages that notion in its branding and messaging. But what does this
look like in action? Let's take a quick look at one popular brand that
honed its differentiation strategy and succeeded as a result.

Like many fast-food chains, Chipotle (see [\#](#)) focuses on the
quality of its ingredients above all else. One of the brand's hallmarks
is that it works with family farmers within a 130-mile radius of each of
its locations and attempts whenever possible to source local and
sustainably raised ingredients. Additionally, Chipotle eliminated
genetically modified (GMO) foods from its menu, citing public concerns
about the safety of genetically modified ingredients.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
Ethics and Corporations
:::

Hundreds of companies are known for being ethical, including Patagonia
(more information later in this chapter), TOMS, and Conscious Coffees,
among others. Read about [five examples of truly ethical companies](#)
and how they are working to make an impact in their markets.

*Business Insider* provides a [list of the most ethical companies](#) in
the world. Do any of the companies on this list surprise you? Are there
companies missing that you think should be included?

What corporate ethical decisions are you aware of that have positively
impacted a company's brand? Here are [10 examples](#) where companies
made the ethical decision.

Many consumers research companies before making a purchasing decision.
Is the ethical footprint of a company important to you? Does it impact
where you purchase products and services? Why or why not?
::::

## Are You an Ethical Consumer? {#sect-00004}

At its most basic level, being an ethical consumer simply means choosing
goods that are ethically sourced, produced, and distributed. Ethical
consumerism has become something of a buzzword over the last decade, and
organizations are taking notice of consumers' expectations in terms of
social and environmental practices. Consider some statistics to better
understand how consumers put ethical consumerism in practice:

According to a

Statista

poll, 90 percent of US survey respondents indicated that they would
boycott a brand if they discovered that the company was engaged in
irresponsible business practices.

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Research from

Mintel

, a market research firm, indicates that 56 percent of US consumers
indicate that they would no longer do business with organizations they
believe to be unethical.

:::: {#note-00005 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

A recent survey showed that consumers seek a match between their beliefs
and those exemplified by the organization. According to the survey, an
overwhelming 72 percent of respondents indicated that they purchase
goods and services from companies with beliefs similar to theirs in
terms of environmental preservation and child labor.

:::: {#note-00006 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

By choosing brands that align with their values, consumers are voting
with their pocketbooks. Modern consumers are more than willing to take
their business elsewhere if they perceive a disconnect between their
values and those of the organization, and they will likely share their
sentiments on social media.

:::: {#note-00007 .note}
::: title
Consumer Ethics
:::

Do consumers care about ethics when making a purchasing decision? You
can find marketers on both sides of the fence on this hotly debated
topic. Some studies show that consumers are interested in products that
align with their values. Other studies show that consumers aren't
interested. According to an [article from *Kellogg Insight*](#) (a
publication from the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern
University), current research by Jacob Teeny, an assistant professor of
marketing at Kellogg, suggests that consumers care.

This Jason Garman TEDx Talk focuses on ethical consumerism and the power
of having a choice and a voice through purchasing decisions.

[Ethical consumerism and the power of having a choice / voice : Jason
Garman at TEDxTeAro](#)

Are you new to ethical shopping? Watch this video to learn the basics
about shopping ethically. Also check out this article to learn specific
reasons for [being an ethical consumer](#).

[Ethical Shopping - An Introduction](#)

This hotly debated topic is becoming a larger part of the conversation
in marketing with the increase of eco-friendly products on the market.
It's important in your marketing work that you're aware of the
discussion, as it will help you to become a great marketer.
::::

:::: {#note-00008 .note}
::: title
Patagonia
:::

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

If you're looking for a company that's a leader in environmental and
social responsibility on many fronts, look no further than Patagonia, a
designer of outdoor clothing gear for the "silent sports"---climbing,
surfing, skiing, snowboarding, fly fishing, and trail running (see
[\#](#)). Just start with Patagonia's mission statement: "Build the best
product, cause no unnecessary harm, use business to inspire and
implement solutions to the environmental crisis."

In addition to being fair-trade certified for all of its sewing
production, the brand knows and publicly discloses all of its first-tier
suppliers and is actively working to map out the rest down to the farm
level for the raw materials used in its gear. Many consider Patagonia to
be an outdoor brand, but it offers products in many categories, from
sundresses to skinny jeans.

A large portion of the company's products are made from recycled
materials or raw organic cotton. Plastic soda bottles are made into
fleece jackets, guayule plants are made into wetsuits, and they take
back worn-out Patagonia products that consumers return to the store at
no charge and then recycle them into their supply chain. Look no further
if you want to be an ethical consumer!

[Read more](#) about Patagonia's environmental responsibility program.
::::

#  {#sect-00005}

This chapter defined consumer markets and consumer buying behavior and
discussed the buyer's black box, the concept that attempts to mark the
pattern consumers follow when making a purchase decision. It also
categorized consumer buying behavior into four types: complex buying
behavior, dissonance-reducing buying behavior, habitual buying behavior,
and variety-seeking buying behavior.

This chapter also looked at the cultural, social, personal,
psychological, and situational factors that influence consumer behavior
and scrutinized the stages of the consumer decision process. Finally, it
examined the role of ethics in consumer buying behavior and discussed
ethical consumerism.

#  {#sect-00006}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00007}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00008}

Knowing yourself well is essential to helping you identify your personal
brand. How would you characterize your personal brand right now? Is it
what you want it to be?

There are numerous free tools to help you gain self-awareness. The
Careers in Marketing section earlier in this chapter lists numerous
resources that you could try. Or you can try this [short personality
assessment](#) that is similar to the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator. After
you complete the assessment, your personality information will be
revealed. You'll learn if you're extroverted or introverted, thinking or
feeling, sensing or intuitive, and judging or perceiving. The results
are shown as a four-letter acronym (for example, ENFP or ISTJ), and
there are 16 possibilities that could arise.

Is the outcome a surprise to you, or is it as expected? Does it help
explain some of your friendships, how you approach your studies, or the
feelings you have? Keep your personality type in mind as you gain better
understanding of yourself and others, and especially as you begin to
develop and express your personal brand.

#  {#sect-00009}

Have you ever wondered where analysts gather consumer behavior data and
how they make sense of it? One way to find out is to ask someone who
currently does this job. Using LinkedIn, conduct a search for data
analysts in your geographic area and invite one or more to connect with
you through the LinkedIn platform. Once connected, send a message to
each one telling them who you are and that you're a marketing student.
Request a 15-minute phone conversation with them to ask them about their
job. Come prepared to the phone conversation with a list of questions
you want to ask. Be prepared to go off script and ask questions that
come to mind on the spot. You can learn a lot about various marketing
careers, and you can make great contacts by simply asking the right
questions! What questions do you want to ask? You might consider some of
the following:

How did you get started in this area of marketing?

Where do you collect data from, and how do you complete an analysis?

What happens after you conduct an analysis?

Do you help make marketing decisions based on your analysis?

What areas of the company does your analysis impact?

What specific courses did you take to prepare you for this job/career?

#  {#sect-00010}

## Wired Coffee Bar {#sect-00011}

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

During high school and college, Lisa worked in an upscale retail
boutique. On the mornings Lisa opened the store, she grew to love the
deep, rich smell of the coffee that would permeate the air from the
local gourmet food store across from the boutique. Her love for coffee
only deepened as she experienced local cafés throughout her travels
while in college. In the back of her mind, she glamorized opening her
own café.

Throughout her early thirties, Lisa looked at locations, talked with
coffee entrepreneurs, developed business feasibility studies, and
dreamed of one day having her own place. One big problem was finding the
right geographical area where a small, independent coffee shop would be
successful.

After moving for the fifth time, Lisa realized the new, growing
community where she now lived with her two small children lacked one
important thing---good coffee. The town was rapidly expanding and was
the fastest-growing community in the state of Tennessee. This might be
the time and place to revisit the idea of a coffee shop.

Every feasibility study Lisa completed pointed to the need for strong
community support. This new town had two important ingredients---college
students and a burgeoning population. The area was abundant with many
different church denominations; a few small, local colleges; and some
new international businesses that had recently relocated to the
community.

With no coffee shop in the town, Lisa believed her concept could be
successful. Currently, if you wanted a coffee, the nearest place to grab
a cup was a Starbucks, which was over 20 minutes away. Starbucks made
specialty coffee mainstream, but it seemed that sitting down to enjoy a
cup of coffee was becoming a thing of the past. As more and more people
began grabbing their coffee from the drive-through, could a community
coffee bar with a wide variety of seating options and complimentary
Wi-Fi be successful?

Going forward with the idea, Lisa began to develop Wired Coffee Bar.
Prior to opening, Lisa went to every local community event and provided
free coffee for people to sample. Once the community had a taste of the
coffee and an expectation for the opening, there was an eager clientele
waiting in line on the first day of business. One customer even hugged
Lisa to thank her for bringing coffee to the community.

The concept took off, and soon Lisa was a purveyor of fine coffee. Wired
Coffee Bar was widely supported by the community. The local churches
loved to meet for a coffee drink and connect with friends and neighbors.
Throughout the day, business was conducted at the tables over a coffee,
and into the evening hours college students gathered to study and talk
with friends.

If you looked at the clientele throughout the day, you could see the
"grab and go" customers who came every morning to get their mochas,
lattes, and cappuccinos. Into the late-morning hours, the tables filled
up with business meetings---builders and their new clients, PTA groups,
pharmaceutical sales reps strategizing for the day and grabbing coffee
for customers, and moms meeting for coffee before picking up kids at
school. As the afternoon wore on, the seats would fill up with high
school students meeting with tutors and friends to complete homework.
The later evening hours had every seat filled with college students
doing class projects or just "hanging out" with friends.

Wired Coffee Bar had a focused niche of coffee and community. The menu
wasn't complex. It featured just coffee---hot, iced, and frozen. Wired
also offered a variety of teas that could be served hot or iced. Along
with the drink options, customers could choose from a selection of sweet
or savory locally baked muffins, scones, quiche, cookies, and coffee
cakes. But Wired was not a restaurant; they were a true coffee bar.

With a regular and steady customer base, Wired could see the busier
times happening when school was in session, and then summers saw a
lighter revenue stream as the college students left and the local
families took summer vacations out of town. The coffee business
definitely needed the local support to offset the vacation schedules of
the college students.

Just as Wired Coffee Bar was hitting its stride, new coffee shops
started to enter the once-dormant community. Each new coffee location
offered a drive-through, something Wired Coffee Bar never wants to
be---fast-food coffee. As Lisa looked at ways to create more business,
provide good coffee, and differentiate from the masses, she wondered if
her concept could survive the hustle and the need for quicker service
and a less laid-back atmosphere.

For further resources, visit the company [website](#). They also have a
[Facebook page](#) and an Instagram account ([\@getwiredcoffee](#)).

## Case Questions {#sect-00012}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00013}

:::: {#rf-022 .note}
::: title
:::

22\.

Statista Research Department, "Share of US Consumers Who Would Stop
Purchasing from Cosmetics Companies That Test on Animals as of April
2017

,"

Statista (April 26, 2017), accessed September 28, 2021,
https://www.statista.com/statistics/753362/cosmetic-animal-testing-attitudes/.
::::

:::: {#rf-023 .note}
::: title
:::

23\.

Herosmyth Staff, "9 Perfect Brand Examples of Why It Pays to
Differentiate," Herosmyth (February 24, 2020), accessed June 13, 2022,
https://www.herosmyth.com/article/9-perfect-brand-examples-why-it-pays-differentiate.
::::

:::: {#rf-024 .note}
::: title
:::

24\.

Yaqub M., "20+ Fascinating Ethical Consumers Statistics Need to Know in
2022," Renolon (January 18, 2022), accessed March 7, 2022,
https://www.renolon.com/ethical-consumers-statistics/.
::::

:::: {#rf-025 .note}
::: title
:::

25\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-026 .note}
::: title
:::

26\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-027 .note}
::: title
:::

27\.

Cory Baldwin, "Ethical, Sustainable Brands You Can Really Trust," Vox
(August 22, 2017), accessed August 4, 2021,
https://www.vox.com/2017/8/22/16171338/ethical-sustainable-fashion-brands-where-to-buy-sustainable-clothes.
::::

:::: {#rf-028 .note}
::: title
:::

28\.

Reasons We Love Patagonia. (n.d.). accessed August 4, 2021, from
https://www.wearedore.com/photos/reasons-we-love-patagonia/.
::::
