m00033

a69d6671-855a-4886-ad20-bbd470e5f656

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

When you think of LEGO, you may imagine a child building a spaceship or
castle, but LEGO wanted to learn more about how children are encouraged
or discouraged to play with its bricks. In 2021, LEGO launched a
research study of close to 7,000 parents and children aged 6 to 14 years
old in seven countries to determine how gender stereotypes influence
play in creative activities.

During this study, LEGO learned that girls are more open to bending
gender roles than boys but that parents have learned to stereotype some
careers as being gender-specific. Additionally, parents are more likely
to encourage girls to play dress-up (83 percent for girls, 17 percent
for boys), dance (81 percent for girls, 15 percent for boys), and bake
(80 percent for girls, 20 percent for boys), while they suggest computer
coding (71 percent for boys, 29 percent for girls) and sports for boys
(76 percent for boys, 24 percent for girls). Due to these findings, LEGO
initiated its "Ready for Girls" campaign.

The data compiled in this study allowed LEGO to take a step forward in
helping to break down some gender norms when it comes to its product. On
October 11, 2021, the International Day of the Girl, LEGO announced a
new program to encourage girls to show their creativity. "Get the World
Ready for Me" was launched with a 10-step guide to collect information
about how girls are engaging with LEGO. Due to this program, LEGO has
launched a campaign of stories about how girls are involved with
imagination and creativity.

Through this campaign, LEGO identified a way to encourage girls to
challenge worldwide views of gender norms (see [\#](#)). The background
necessary for this campaign was researched and used in a way that would
help the company stand out. For LEGO and many other companies and
organizations, research is its competitive advantage.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

# Endnotes {#sect-00001}

:::: {#rf-001 .note}
::: title
:::

1\.

"Girls Are Ready to Overcome Gender Norms but Society Continues to
Enforce Biases That Hamper Their Creative Potential," About Us, The LEGO
Group, October 10, 2021,
https://www.lego.com/en-us/aboutus/news/2021/september/lego-ready-for-girls-campaign/.
::::
