m00034

5e2838dc-0331-4a41-b9c4-3cb3804ff83d

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define marketing research.

Explain how marketing information provides an understanding of the
customer and the marketplace.

Explain the role of big data and the marketing information system.

# What Is Marketing Research? {#sect-00002}

Oftentimes people think of marketing as the process of communicating
with a target market---sharing messages, products, and value with
customers. However, marketers know that understanding customers,
learning about their wants and needs, and developing a relationship with
them is essential for success. Marketing research allows marketers to
listen and assess the needs of the market, to understand what's missing
and how to reduce those gaps from their customers, target markets, and
prospective clients. Managers need marketing information in order to
make data-driven decisions rather than make assumptions about consumers.
In this chapter we're going to investigate the importance of marketing
research, some strategies employed in the field, and how to complete the
marketing research process.

Marketing research is the work to gather information and data about
customers and markets. Let's look at the definition, why it's important,
and the influx of big data.

## Marketing Research Defined {#sect-00003}

According to the American Marketing Association (AMA), marketing
research "is the function that links the consumer, customer, and public
to the marketer through information." Marketing research presents
information gained through various sources as a resource for managers to
make data-driven business decisions. Additionally, the AMA states that
"marketing research specifies the information required to address these
issues, designs the method for collecting information, manages and
implements the data collection process, analyzes the results, and
communicates the findings and their implications."

## The Importance of Marketing Information {#sect-00004}

Marketing information, also known as business intelligence, competitive
intelligence, or marketing intelligence, is information about the market
that helps to identify opportunities in the market. This information
helps to determine a company's strengths and weaknesses while also
evaluating the external environment's opportunities and threats. Ideas
generated through analysis of marketing information support business
decision-making from a long-term strategic approach to smaller issues at
a tactical level.

Marketing information is essential for a company or organization to stay
competitive and also meet the customer's needs. As referenced above,
LEGO used marketing research to gather information about how children
use its product but also how parents felt about opportunities for their
children. Universities and colleges use information gathered through
marketing research to build next year's recruitment materials by asking
students their perceptions of the previous year's items. Additionally, a
fast-food restaurant might conduct an analysis of the time of day each
of its items are more likely to be purchased. Obvious to most, coffee
would probably be an item more likely ordered earlier in the day. Other
items might not be as evident but could require different preparation
times. By accounting for when each of these items is most likely to be
ordered, the restaurant can plan its inventory and schedule of employees
more efficiently.

## Big Data and the Marketing Information System (MIS) {#sect-00005}

The amount of data currently available is not only vast but is growing
at an exponential level every day, which describes the concept of big
data. Big data is the countless number of records that continues in an
increasing capacity and at a faster rate. Because of the constantly
changing landscape of data, it's difficult for companies to develop an
approach for analyzing it. Big data is often described through the use
of the three Vs: volume, velocity, and variety. The amount of data, or
volume, is more than we have ever witnessed. Additionally, it is growing
at a fast rate; the velocity is also ever increasing. We expect that the
velocity of data will continue to surge exponentially as each day more
users are contributing to the data available. Finally, there is the
variety of data that is part of this enormous data set---because each
user is contributing to the cache of data available, the diversity of
data is just as unique as its creators.

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
What Is Big Data?
:::

Big data is massive amounts of data. But what does that mean? Think of
all the data a smartphone generates with texts, searches, emails,
photos, etc. Now consider how many smartphone users there are in the
world. Watch this video and learn how much data is generated on the
internet each day and how it can be classified through the three Vs
concept.

[Big Data In 5 Minutes \| What Is Big Data?\| Big Data Analytics \| Big
Data Tutorial \| Simplilearn](#)
::::

"Big data has become one of the most valuable assets held by
enterprises, and virtually every large organization is making
investments in big data initiatives." This statement was based on a 2021
NewVantage Partners survey of senior C-level executives at Fortune 1000
companies regarding their perceptions of big data and their utilization
of its resources. NewVantage Partners learned that many companies are
already pursuing this data, with 96 percent reporting that their
companies have already had success using big data and artificial
intelligence programs. Additionally, 99 percent of the executives
surveyed are pursuing either new or existing big data programs. Why are
companies so keen to invest in this source? It is estimated that the
world creates approximately 2.5 quintillion bytes of data daily. This
vast accumulation of data can be collected through various methods, such
as point-of-sale databases, connected devices through the Internet of
Things (IoT), third-party marketing research firms, social media,
location data from mobile devices, or surveys. Tapping into the resource
generators is helpful for companies to understand their customers,
employees, or others.

So, who are these data generators? They are everyone, like you and your
friends, who post content on social media, engage with web content
through streaming services, and share stories through web applications.
In addition, businesses are contributing to the massive amount of
content available. Extra data (volume), at a faster rate (velocity), and
from a more widely diverse set of people (variety) explain why it is
called "big" data. So how do businesses and individuals capitalize on
this vast data world?

In order to be able to utilize and make the most of the availability of
business data, businesses use a marketing information system to collect,
analyze, and report interesting findings from internal and external data
of the company. This system is an ever-changing database of content that
is used to support the company or organization's marketing efforts. The
marketing information system is the collection of data and requires
actions taken by marketers to utilize the data saved.

:::: {#note-00007 .note}
::: title
Market Research Analysts
:::

Market research analysts are needed in numerous industries, and
according to the [US Bureau of Labor and Statistics](#), the job outlook
has a much higher rate of growth than average. Read about the skills
needed, typical pay, [education requirements, and career outlook in this
article](#) and watch this video about the various types of jobs
available as a market research analyst.

[How to Become a Marketing Analyst](#)
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00006}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00007}

:::: {#rf-002 .note}
::: title
:::

2\.

"Definitions of Marketing," American Marketing Association, last
modified July 20, 2022,
https://www.ama.org/the-definition-of-marketing-what-is-marketing/.
::::

:::: {#rf-003 .note}
::: title
:::

3\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-004 .note}
::: title
:::

4\.

Mary K. Pratt, "How Big Data Collection Works: Process, Challenges,
Techniques," Tech Accelerator, TechTarget, February 7, 2022,
https://www.techtarget.com/searchdatamanagement/feature/Big-data-collection-processes-challenges-and-best-practices.
::::

:::: {#rf-005 .note}
::: title
:::

5\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-006 .note}
::: title
:::

6\.

Rob Kitchin and Gavin McArdle, "What Makes Big Data, Big Data? Exploring
the Ontological Characteristics of 26 Datasets,"

Big Data & Society

3, no. 1 (January--June 2016), https://doi.org/10.1177/2053951716631130.
::::

# 

big data

the countless number of records that continues in an increasing capacity
and at a faster rate; often described as volume, velocity, and variety
of data generated

marketing information

also known as business intelligence, competitive intelligence, or
marketing intelligence; information about the market that helps to
identify opportunities available

marketing information system

a system used to collect, analyze, and report interesting findings from
internal and external data of the company

marketing research

the function that links the consumer, customer, and public to the
marketer through information
