m00035

af4d3e63-95d6-4922-817d-ee51e1db4656

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify sources of marketing information.

Describe the different categories of marketing information.

# Identify Sources of Marketing Information {#sect-00002}

Data, as mentioned in the first section of this chapter, comes from a
variety of sources. In this section, we'll investigate the sources of
important marketing information and how these resources can be accessed
to meet the needs of the institution. Online resources such as company
websites, journal databases, and e-commerce locations could provide
valuable resources to someone opening a new business. For instance, if a
new product is to be sold, some companies will review competitors'
websites to glean information about comparable pricing before setting
their price. The sources identified are closely aligned with the
category of information and are described below.

# Describe the Different Categories of Marketing Information {#sect-00003}

Marketing information can be derived from many sources. We will review
three types in this section---internal data, external data, and
competitive intelligence---and further explain other types of data in
the next section. External and internal data both have unique qualities
that make them essential for businesses to utilize. Additionally,
competitive intelligence refer to specific types of data that must be
examined to further the company or organization's continued success and
effectiveness.

## External Data and Databases {#sect-00004}

External data is data that originates from outside the organization.
Examples of external data would be information gleaned from customers
through a customer service survey or reviews of a competitor's website.
Previously we learned about big data and the volume of information that
is available daily. These data pieces would also be considered external
data. Competitive and market intelligence is often gathered through
these external sources of material. Data sources can include any
interested parties of the business or a competitor's business, social
media mentions, news articles, journal publications, and others. The
only limitation of collecting external data is financial. Not all
sources of information are free, and the time spent to collect these
insights is also a valuable commodity as "time is money." Once external
information is collected and available for those within the institution,
it can be considered internal data.

## Internal Data and Databases {#sect-00005}

Critical marketing intelligence can be data that already exists in the
company's databases. This data is called internal data and gives the
company a historic view of what has worked in the past as well as
identifies times when the company did not meet its goals. Internal data
includes sales, promotional effectiveness, pricing, product launch
information, research and development, and logistics information.
Examples of internal data include the percentage of coupons redeemed,
the sales volume at specific prices, the highest-grossing motion picture
for a production company, and even the most-missed question on last
unit's marketing exam.

Businesses, organizations, nonprofits, and even colleges and
universities use these types of data sources to make day-to-day and more
comprehensive decisions. A database is a collection of related data. For
instance, at the school you are currently attending, there are multiple
databases---one for current students, one for alumni, and still another
for faculty. Within each of these databases, there is information about
that specific population. The current student database will be a list of
all students who are enrolled in courses this term, with additional
information such as what courses they are enrolled in, any past
enrollments, grades earned, major, hometown, and academic advisor's
name.

## Competitive Intelligence {#sect-00006}

Marketing research can be conducted on every aspect of business and
marketing. Understanding the competition and its strengths and
weaknesses through an analysis of the industry and competing forces
gives a company a competitive edge. Competitive intelligence is the
collection of that information from the marketplace. A company's
position must be examined to determine if it matches with the needs of
the customers.

This competitive intelligence may be related to any of the marketing mix
elements: product, price, distribution, or promotion. Checking prices of
competitors' products to make sure a company's pricing is competitive,
conducting a promotional audit to verify reach of the messages, or
examining the competitive industry's distribution channels may allow the
company to identify a new location, and all help to make the company
more educated on future decisions. When in a competitive space, why do
customers choose the competitor over the company's products? Marketing
research can come in many forms and helps managers to make data-driven
decisions. Once this data is collected, it becomes part of the business
or organization's internal data cache.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00007}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# 

competitive intelligence

a collection of information about competitors from the marketplace

database

a collection of related data

external data

data that originates from outside the organization

internal data

critical marketing intelligence that already exists in the company's
records
