m00036

b0da0182-bcb3-44fb-8431-b527e4c3342f

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify and describe the steps in a marketing research plan.

Discuss the different types of data research.

Explain how data is analyzed.

Discuss the importance of effective research reports.

# Define the Problem {#sect-00002}

There are seven steps to a successful marketing research project (see
[\#](#)). Each step will be explained as we investigate how a marketing
research project is conducted.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

The first step, defining the problem, is often a realization that more
information is needed in order to make a data-driven decision. Problem
definition is the realization that there is an issue that needs to be
addressed. An entrepreneur may be interested in opening a small business
but must first define the problem that is to be investigated. A
marketing research problem in this example is to discover the needs of
the community and also to identify a potentially successful business
venture.

Many times, researchers define a research question or objectives in this
first step. Objectives of this research study could include: identify a
new business that would be successful in the community in question,
determine the size and composition of a target market for the business
venture, and collect any relevant primary and secondary data that would
support such a venture. At this point, the definition of the problem may
be "Why are cat owners not buying our new cat toy subscription service?"

Additionally, during this first step we would want to investigate our
target population for research. This is similar to a target market, as
it is the group that comprises the population of interest for the study.
In order to have a successful research outcome, the researcher should
start with an understanding of the problem in the current situational
environment.

# Develop the Research Plan {#sect-00003}

Step two is to develop the research plan. What type of research is
necessary to meet the established objectives of the first step? How will
this data be collected? Additionally, what is the time frame of the
research and budget to consider? If you must have information in the
next week, a different plan would be implemented than in a situation
where several months were allowed. These are issues that a researcher
should address in order to meet the needs identified.

Research is often classified as coming from one of two types of data:
primary and secondary. Primary data is unique information that is
collected by the specific researcher with the current project in mind.
This type of research doesn't currently exist until it is pulled
together for the project. Examples of primary data collection include
survey, observation, experiment, or focus group data that is gathered
for the current project.

Secondary data is any research that was completed for another purpose
but can be used to help inform the research process. Secondary data
comes in many forms and includes census data, journal articles,
previously collected survey or focus group data of related topics, and
compiled company data. Secondary data may be internal, such as the
company's sales records for a previous quarter, or external, such as an
industry report of all related product sales. Syndicated data, a type of
external secondary data, is available through subscription services and
is utilized by many marketers. As you can see in [\#](#), primary and
secondary data features are often opposite---the positive aspects of
primary data are the negative side of secondary data.

                     *Strengths*                                                                                                 *Weaknesses*
  ------------------ ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  *Primary Data*     Can be structured to be exactly what is needed Under complete control of researchers Timely, current data   Expensive to implement Takes time to compile May not be generalizable beyond specific research question
  *Secondary Data*   Generally inexpensive or free Can be accessed quickly Available through a variety of sources                May not match required parameters Can be outdated Same data accessible by competitors

  : The Strengths and Weaknesses of Primary and Secondary Data
  {#table-00001}

There are four research types that can be used: exploratory,
descriptive, experimental, and ethnographic research designs (see
[\#](#)). Each type has specific formats of data that can be collected.
Qualitative research can be shared through words, descriptions, and
open-ended comments. Qualitative data gives context but cannot be
reduced to a statistic. Qualitative data examples are categorical and
include case studies, diary accounts, interviews, focus groups, and
open-ended surveys. By comparison, quantitative data is data that can be
reduced to number of responses. The number of responses to each answer
on a multiple-choice question is quantitative data. Quantitative data is
numerical and includes things like age, income, group size, and height.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

Exploratory research is usually used when additional general information
in desired about a topic. When in the initial steps of a new project,
understanding the landscape is essential, so exploratory research helps
the researcher to learn more about the general nature of the industry.
Exploratory research can be collected through focus groups, interviews,
and review of secondary data. When examining an exploratory research
design, the best use is when your company hopes to collect data that is
generally qualitative in nature.

For instance, if a company is considering a new service for registered
users but is not quite sure how well the new service will be received or
wants to gain clarity of exactly how customers may use a future service,
the company can host a focus group. Focus groups and interviews will be
examined later in the chapter. The insights collected during the focus
group can assist the company when designing the service, help to inform
promotional campaign options, and verify that the service is going to be
a viable option for the company.

Descriptive research design takes a bigger step into collection of data
through primary research complemented by secondary data. Descriptive
research helps explain the market situation and define an "opinion,
attitude, or behavior" of a group of consumers, employees, or other
interested groups. The most common method of deploying a descriptive
research design is through the use of a survey. Several types of surveys
will be defined later in this chapter. Descriptive data is quantitative
in nature, meaning the data can be distilled into a statistic, such as
in a table or chart.

Again, descriptive data is helpful in explaining the current situation.
In the opening example of LEGO, the company wanted to describe the
situation regarding children's use of its product. In order to gather a
large group of opinions, a survey was created. The data that was
collected through this survey allowed the company to measure the
existing perceptions of parents so that alterations could be made to
future plans for the company.

Experimental research, also known as causal research, helps to define a
cause-and-effect relationship between two or more factors. This type of
research goes beyond a correlation to determine which feature caused the
reaction. Researchers generally use some type of experimental design to
determine a causal relationship. An example is A/B testing, a situation
where one group of research participants, group A, is exposed to one
treatment and then compared to the group B participants, who experience
a different situation. An example might be showing two different
television commercials to a panel of consumers and then measuring the
difference in perception of the product. Another example would be to
have two separate packaging options available in different markets. This
research would answer the question "Does one design sell better than the
other?" Comparing that to the sales in each market would be part of a
causal research study.

The final method of collecting data is through an ethnographic design.
Ethnographic research is conducted in the field by watching people
interact in their natural environment. For marketing research,
ethnographic designs help to identify how a product is used, what
actions are included in a selection, or how the consumer interacts with
the product.

Examples of ethnographic research would be to observe how a consumer
uses a particular product, such as baking soda. Although many people buy
baking soda, its uses are vast. So are they using it as a refrigerator
deodorizer, a toothpaste, to polish a belt buckle, or to use in baking a
cake?

# Select the Data Collection Method {#sect-00004}

Data collection is the systematic gathering of information that
addresses the identified problem. What is the best method to do that?
Picking the right method of collecting data requires that the researcher
understand the target population and the design picked in the previous
step. There is no perfect method; each method has both advantages and
disadvantages, so it's essential that the researcher understand the
target population of the research and the research objectives in order
to pick the best option.

Sometimes the data desired is best collected by watching the actions of
consumers. For instance, how many cars pass a specific billboard in a
day? What website led a potential customer to the company's website?
When are consumers most likely to use the snack vending machines at
work? What time of day has the highest traffic on a social media post?
What is the most streamed television program this week? Observational
research is the collecting of data based on actions taken by those
observed. Many data observations do not require the researched
individuals to participate in the data collection effort to be highly
valuable. Some observation requires an individual to watch and record
the activities of the target population through personal observations.

Unobtrusive observation happens when those being observed aren't aware
that they are being watched. An example of an unobtrusive observation
would be to watch how shoppers interact with a new stuffed animal
display by using a one-way mirror. Marketers can identify which products
were handled more often while also determining which were ignored.

Other methods can use technology to collect the data instead. Instances
of mechanical observation include the use of vehicle recorders, which
count the number of vehicles that pass a specific location. Computers
can also assess the number of shoppers who enter a store, the most
popular entry point for train station commuters, or the peak time for
cars to park in a parking garage.

When you want to get a more in-depth response from research
participants, one method is to complete a one-on-one interview.
One-on-one interviews allow the researcher to ask specific questions
that match the respondent's unique perspective as well as follow-up
questions that piggyback on responses already completed. An interview
allows the researcher to have a deeper understanding of the needs of the
respondent, which is another strength of this type of data collection.
The downside of personal interviews it that a discussion can be very
time-consuming and results in only one respondent's answers. Therefore,
in order to get a large sample of respondents, the interview method may
not be the most efficient method.

Taking the benefits of an interview and applying them to a small group
of people is the design of a focus group. A focus group is a small
number of people, usually 8 to 12, who meet the sample requirements.
These individuals together are asked a series of questions where they
are encouraged to build upon each other's responses, either by agreeing
or disagreeing with the other group members. Focus groups are similar to
interviews in that they allow the researcher, through a moderator, to
get more detailed information from a small group of potential customers
(see [\#](#)).

:::: {#note-00005 .note}
::: title
Focus Groups
:::

Focus groups are a common method for gathering insights into consumer
thinking and habits. Companies will use this information to develop or
shift their initiatives. The best way to understand a focus group is to
watch a few examples or explanations. TED-Ed has this video that
explains how focus groups work.

[How do focus groups work? - Hector Lanz](#)

You might be asking when it is best to use a focus group or a survey.
Learn the differences, the pros and cons of each, and the specific types
of [questions you ask in both situations in this article](#).

Preparing for a focus group is critical to success. It requires knowing
the material and questions while also managing the group of people.
Watch this video to learn more about how to prepare for a focus group
and the types of things to be aware of.

[Preparing for Focus Groups: Qualitative Research Methods](#)
::::

One of the benefits of a focus group over individual interviews is that
synergy can be generated when a participant builds on another's ideas.
Additionally, for the same amount of time, a researcher can hear from
multiple respondents instead of just one. Of course, as with every
method of data collection, there are downsides to a focus group as well.
Focus groups have the potential to be overwhelmed by one or two
aggressive personalities, and the format can discourage more reserved
individuals from speaking up. Finally, like interviews, the responses in
a focus group are qualitative in nature and are difficult to distill
into an easy statistic or two.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

Combining a variety of questions on one instrument is called a survey or
questionnaire. Collecting primary data is commonly done through surveys
due to their versatility. A survey allows the researcher to ask the same
set of questions of a large group of respondents. Response rates of
surveys are calculated by dividing the number of surveys completed by
the total number attempted. Surveys are flexible and can collect a
variety of quantitative and qualitative data. Questions can include
simplified yes or no questions, select all that apply, questions that
are on a scale, or a variety of open-ended types of questions. There are
four types of surveys (see [\#](#)) we will cover, each with strengths
and weaknesses defined.

                         *Strengths*                                                                      *Weaknesses*
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  *Mailed Surveys*       Ability to reach large population Convenience of respondent                      Time delays Expensive
  *Phone Surveys*        Respondent can ask questions Collection in real time                             Time intensive People don't answer calls from numbers they don't know
  *In-Person Surveys*    Respondent can ask questions Follow-up questions can be asked based on answers   Time intensive People avoid talking with strangers
  *Electronic Surveys*   Less time intensive than other methods Less expensive                            Identification as spam Low response rate

  : The Four Survey Method Options {#table-00002}

Let's start off with mailed surveys---surveys that are sent to potential
respondents through a mail service. Mailed surveys used to be more
commonly used due to the ability to reach every household. In some
instances, a mailed survey is still the best way to collect data. For
example, every 10 years the United States conducts a census of its
population (see [\#](#)). The first step in that data collection is to
send every household a survey through the US Postal Service (USPS). The
benefit is that respondents can complete and return the survey at their
convenience. The downside of mailed surveys are expense and timeliness
of responses. A mailed survey requires postage, both when it is sent to
the recipient and when it is returned. That, along with the cost of
printing, paper, and both sending and return envelopes, adds up quickly.
Additionally, physically mailing surveys takes time. One method of
reducing cost is to send with bulk-rate postage, but that slows down the
delivery of the survey. Also, because of the convenience to the
respondent, completed surveys may be returned several weeks after being
sent. Finally, some mailed survey data must be manually entered into the
analysis software, which can cause delays or issues due to entry errors.

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

Phone surveys are completed during a phone conversation with the
respondent. Although the traditional phone survey requires a data
collector to talk with the participant, current technology allows for
computer-assisted voice surveys or surveys to be completed by asking the
respondent to push a specific button for each potential answer. Phone
surveys are time intensive but allow the respondent to ask questions and
the surveyor to request additional information or clarification on a
question if warranted. Phone surveys require the respondent to complete
the survey simultaneously with the collector, which is a limitation as
there are restrictions for when phone calls are allowed. According to
Telephone Consumer Protection Act, approved by Congress in 1991, no
calls can be made prior to 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. in the
recipient's time zone. Many restrictions are outlined in this original
legislation and have been added to since due to ever-changing
technology.

In-person surveys are when the respondent and data collector are
physically in the same location. In-person surveys allow the respondent
to share specific information, ask questions of the surveyor, and follow
up on previous answers. Surveys collected through this method can take
place in a variety of ways: through door-to-door collection, in a public
location, or at a person's workplace. Although in-person surveys are
time intensive and require more labor to collect data than some other
methods, in some cases it's the best way to collect the required data.
In-person surveys conducted through a door-to-door method is the
follow-up used for the census if respondents do not complete the mailed
survey. One of the downsides of in-person surveys is the reluctance of
potential respondents to stop their current activity and answer
questions. Furthermore, people may not feel comfortable sharing private
or personal information during a face-to-face conversation.

Electronic surveys are sent or collected through digital means and is an
opportunity that can be added to any of the above methods as well as
some new delivery options. Surveys can be sent through email, and
respondents can either reply to the email or open a hyperlink to an
online survey (see [\#](#)). Additionally, a letter can be mailed that
asks members of the survey sample to log in to a website rather than to
return a mailed response. Many marketers now use links, QR codes, or
electronic devices to easily connect to a survey. Digitally collected
data has the benefit of being less time intensive and is often a more
economical way to gather and input responses than more manual methods. A
survey that could take months to collect through the mail can be
completed within a week through digital means.

<figure id="fig-00005">

</figure>

# Design the Sample {#sect-00005}

Although you might want to include every possible person who matches
your target market in your research, it's often not a feasible option,
nor is it of value. If you did decide to include everyone, you would be
completing a census of the population. Getting everyone to participate
would be time-consuming and highly expensive, so instead marketers use a
sample, whereby a portion of the whole is included in the research. It's
similar to the samples you might receive at the grocery store or ice
cream shop; it isn't a full serving, but it does give you a good taste
of what the whole would be like.

So how do you know who should be included in the sample? Researchers
identify parameters for their studies, called sample frames. A sample
frame for one study may be college students who live on campus; for
another study, it may be retired people in Dallas, Texas, or
small-business owners who have fewer than 10 employees. The individual
entities within the sampling frame would be considered a sampling unit.
A sampling unit is each individual respondent that would be considered
as matching the sample frame established by the research. If a
researcher wants businesses to participate in a study, then businesses
would be the sampling unit in that case.

The number of sampling units included in the research is the sample
size. Many calculations can be conducted to indicate what the correct
size of the sample should be. Issues to consider are the size of the
population, the confidence level that the data represents the entire
population, the ease of accessing the units in the frame, and the budget
allocated for the research.

There are two main categories of samples: probability and nonprobability
(see [\#](#)). Probability samples are those in which every member of
the sample has an identified likelihood of being selected. Several
probability sample methods can be utilized. One probability sampling
technique is called a simple random sample, where not only does every
person have an identified likelihood of being selected to be in the
sample, but every person also has an equal chance of exclusion. An
example of a simple random sample would be to put the names of all
members of a group into a hat and simply draw out a specific number to
be included. You could say a raffle would be a good example of a simple
random sample.

<figure id="fig-00006">

</figure>

Another probability sample type is a stratified random sample, where the
population is divided into groups by category and then a random sample
of each category is selected to participate. For instance, if you were
conducting a study of college students from your school and wanted to
make sure you had all grade levels included, you might take the names of
all students and split them into different groups by grade
level---freshman, sophomore, junior, and senior. Then, from those
categories, you would draw names out of each of the pools, or strata.

A nonprobability sample is a situation in which each potential member of
the sample has an unknown likelihood of being selected in the sample.
Research findings that are from a nonprobability sample cannot be
applied beyond the sample. Several examples of nonprobability sampling
are available to researchers and include two that we will look at more
closely: convenience sampling and judgment sampling.

The first nonprobability sampling technique is a convenience sample.
Just like it sounds, a convenience sample is when the researcher finds a
group through a nonscientific method by picking potential research
participants in a convenient manner. An example might be to ask other
students in a class you are taking to complete a survey that you are
doing for a class assignment or passing out surveys at a basketball game
or theater performance.

A judgment sample is a type of nonprobability sample that allows the
researcher to determine if they believe the individual meets the
criteria set for the sample frame to complete the research. For
instance, you may be interested in researching mothers, so you sit
outside a toy store and ask an individual who is carrying a baby to
participate.

# Collect the Data {#sect-00006}

Now that all the plans have been established, the instrument has been
created, and the group of participants has been identified, it is time
to start collecting data. As explained earlier in this chapter, data
collection is the process of gathering information from a variety of
sources that will satisfy the research objectives defined in step one.
Data collection can be as simple as sending out an email with a survey
link enclosed or as complex as an experiment with hundreds of consumers.
The method of collection directly influences the length of this process.
Conducting personal interviews or completing an experiment, as
previously mentioned, can add weeks or months to the research process,
whereas sending out an electronic survey may allow a researcher to
collect the necessary data in a few days.

# Analyze and Interpret the Data {#sect-00007}

Once the data has been collected, the process of analyzing it may begin.
Data analysis is the distillation of the information into a more
understandable and actionable format. The analysis itself can take many
forms, from the use of basic statistics to a more comprehensive data
visualization process. First, let's discuss some basic statistics that
can be used to represent data.

The first is the mean of quantitative data. A mean is often defined as
the arithmetic average of values. The formula is:

$$\frac{{Sum}~{of}~{Values}}{{Number}~{of}~{Values}}$$

A common use of the mean calculation is with exam scores. Say, for
example, you have earned the following scores on your marketing exams:
72, 85, 68, and 77. To find the mean, you would add up the four scores
for a total of 302. Then, in order to generate a mean, that number needs
to be divided by the number of exam scores included, which is 4. The
mean would be 302 divided by 4, for a mean test score of 75.5.
Understanding the mean can help to determine, with one number, the
weight of a particular value.

Another commonly used statistic is median. The median is often referred
to as the middle number. To generate a median, all the numeric answers
are placed in order, and the middle number is the median. Median is a
common statistic when identifying the income level of a specific
geographic region. For instance, the median household income for
Albuquerque, New Mexico, between 2015 and 2019 was \$52,911. In this
case, there are just as many people with an income above the amount as
there are below.

Mode is another statistic that is used to represent data of all types,
as it can be used with quantitative or qualitative data and represents
the most frequent answer. Eye color, hair color, and vehicle color can
all be presented with a mode statistic. Additionally, some researchers
expand on the concept of mode and present the frequency of all
responses, not just identifying the most common response. Data such as
this can easily be presented in a frequency graph, such as the one in
[\#](#).

<figure id="fig-00007">

</figure>

Additionally, researchers use other analyses to represent the data
rather than to present the entirety of each response. For example, maybe
the relationship between two values is important to understand. In this
case, the researcher may share the data as a cross tabulation (see
[\#](#)). Below is the same data as above regarding social media use
cross tabulated with gender---as you can see, the data is more
descriptive when you can distinguish between the gender identifiers and
how much time is spent per day on social media.

<figure id="fig-00008">

</figure>

Not all data can be presented in a graphical format due to the nature of
the information. Sometimes with qualitative methods of data collection,
the responses cannot be distilled into a simple statistic or graph. In
that case, the use of quotations, otherwise known as verbatims, can be
used. These are direct statements presented by the respondents. Often
you will see a verbatim statement when reading a movie or book review.
The critic's statements are used in part or in whole to represent their
feelings about the newly released item.

:::: {#note-00012 .note}
::: title
Infographics
:::

As they say, a picture is worth a thousand words. For this reason,
research results are often shown in a graphical format in which data can
be taken in quickly, called an infographic.

Check out [this infographic on what components make for a good
infographic.](#) As you can see, a good infographic needs four
components: data, design, a story, and the ability to share it with
others. Without all four pieces, it is not as valuable a resource as it
could be. The ultimate infographic is represented as the intersection of
all four.

Infographics are particularly advantageous online. Refer to [this
infographic on why they are beneficial to use online](#).
::::

# Prepare the Research Report {#sect-00008}

The marketing research process concludes by sharing the generated data
and makes recommendations for future actions. What starts as simple data
must be interpreted into an analysis. All information gathered should be
conveyed in order to make decisions for future marketing actions. One
item that is often part of the final step is to discuss areas that may
have been missed with the current project or any area of further study
identified while completing it. Without the final step of the marketing
research project, the first six steps are without value. It is only
after the information is shared, through a formal presentation or
report, that those recommendations can be implemented and improvements
made. The first six steps are used to generate information, while the
last is to initiate action. During this last step is also when an
evaluation of the process is conducted. If this research were to be
completed again, how would we do it differently? Did the right questions
get answered with the survey questions posed to the respondents?
Follow-up on some of these key questions can lead to additional
research, a different study, or further analysis of data collected.

# Methods of Quantifying Marketing Research {#sect-00009}

One of the ways of sharing information gained through marketing research
is to quantify the research. Quantifying the research means to take a
variety of data and compile into a quantity that is more easily
understood. This is a simple process if you want to know how many people
attended a basketball game, but if you want to quantify the number of
students who made a positive comment on a questionnaire, it can be a
little more complicated. Researchers have a variety of methods to
collect and then share these different scores. Below are some of the
most common types used in business.

## Awareness {#sect-00010}

Is a customer aware of a product, brand, or company? What is meant by
awareness? Awareness in the context of marketing research is when a
consumer is familiar with the product, brand, or company. It does not
assume that the consumer has tried the product or has purchased it.
Consumers are just aware. That is a measure that many businesses find
valuable. There are several ways to measure awareness. For instance, the
first type of awareness is unaided awareness. This type of awareness is
when no prompts for a product, brand, or company are given. If you were
collecting information on fast-food restaurants, you might ask a
respondent to list all the fast-food restaurants that serve a chicken
sandwich. Aided awareness would be providing a list of products, brands,
or companies and the respondent selects from the list. For instance, if
you give a respondent a list of fast-food restaurants and ask them to
mark all the locations with a chicken sandwich, you are collecting data
through an aided method. Collecting these answers helps a company
determine how the business location compares to those of its
competitors.

## Customer Satisfaction (CSAT) {#sect-00011}

Have you ever been asked to complete a survey at the end of a purchase?
Many businesses complete research on buying, returning, or other
customer service processes. A customer satisfaction score, also known as
CSAT, is a measure of how satisfied customers are with the product,
brand, or service. A CSAT score is usually on a scale of 0 to 100
percent. But what constitutes a "good" CSAT score? Although what is
identified as good can vary by industry, normally anything in the range
from 75 to 85 would be considered good. Of course, a number higher than
85 would be considered exceptional.

## Customer Acquisition Cost (CAC) and Customer Effort Score (CES) {#sect-00012}

Other metrics often used are a customer acquisition cost (CAC) and
customer effort score (CES). How much does it cost a company to gain
customers? That's the purpose of calculating the customer acquisition
cost. To calculate the customer acquisition cost, a company would need
to total all expenses that were accrued to gain new customers. This
would include any advertising, public relations, social media postings,
etc. When a total cost is determined, it is divided by the number of new
customers gained through this campaign.

The final score to discuss is the customer effort score, also known as a
CES. The CES is a "survey used to measure the ease of service experience
with an organization." Companies that are easy to work with have a
better CES than a company that is notorious for being difficult. An
example would be to ask a consumer about the ease of making a purchase
online by incorporating a one-question survey after a purchase is
confirmed. If a number of responses come back negative or slightly
negative, the company will realize that it needs to investigate and
develop a more user-friendly process.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00013}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00014}

:::: {#rf-007 .note}
::: title
:::

7\.

Raimo Streefkerk, "Qualitative vs. Quantitative Research," Methodology,
Scribbr, revised August 13, 2021,
https://www.scribbr.com/methodology/qualitative-quantitative-research/.
::::

:::: {#rf-008 .note}
::: title
:::

8\.

"The 3 Types of Survey Research and When to Use Them," SurveyMonkey,
Momentive, last modified May 4, 2021,
https://www.surveymonkey.com/mp/3-types-survey-research/.
::::

:::: {#rf-009 .note}
::: title
:::

9\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-010 .note}
::: title
:::

10\.

Ken Anderson, "Ethnographic Research: A Key to Strategy,"

Harvard Business Review

, March 2009, 24,
https://hbr.org/2009/03/ethnographic-research-a-key-to-strategy.
::::

:::: {#rf-011 .note}
::: title
:::

11\.

"Data Collection Methods: Definition, Examples and Sources,"

Online Survey Software and Data Intelligence Blog

, QuestionPro, last modified July 21, 2022,
https://www.questionpro.com/blog/data-collection-methods/.
::::

:::: {#rf-012 .note}
::: title
:::

12\.

"Restrictions on Telemarketing, Telephone Solicitation, and Facsimile
Advertising," 47 C.F.R. 64.1200, 2021 comp., p. 486, sec. (c)(1),
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CFR-2021-title47-vol3/pdf/CFR-2021-title47-vol3-sec64-1200.pdf.
::::

:::: {#rf-013 .note}
::: title
:::

13\.

Pritha Bhandari, "A Step-by-Step Guide to Data Collection," Methodology,
Scribbr, revised August 13, 2021,
https://www.scribbr.com/methodology/data-collection/.
::::

:::: {#rf-014 .note}
::: title
:::

14\.

Statistics.com, Glossary, s.v. "Median," accessed November 21, 2021,
https://www.statistics.com/glossary/median/.
::::

:::: {#rf-015 .note}
::: title
:::

15\.

"Albuquerque City, New Mexico," QuickFacts, United States Census Bureau,
accessed November 23, 2021,
https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/fact/table/albuquerquecitynewmexico/PST040219.
::::

:::: {#rf-016 .note}
::: title
:::

16\.

Statistics.com, Glossary, s.v. "Mode," accessed November 21, 2021,
https://www.statistics.com/glossary/mode/; Statistics.com, Glossary,
s.v. "Frequency Distribution," accessed November 21, 2021,
https://www.statistics.com/glossary/frequency-distribution/.
::::

:::: {#rf-017 .note}
::: title
:::

17\.

"Unaided vs. Aided Brand Awareness Survey Questions: What Do They Tell
You?," SurveyMonkey, Momentive, last modified April 9, 2021,
https://www.surveymonkey.com/mp/unaided-vs-aided-brand-awareness-survey-questions/.
::::

:::: {#rf-018 .note}
::: title
:::

18\.

"What Is CSAT and How Do You Measure It?," Experience Management,
Qualtrics, last modified August 10, 2022,
https://www.qualtrics.com/experience-management/customer/what-is-csat/.
::::

:::: {#rf-019 .note}
::: title
:::

19\.

Dom Nicastro, "What Is Customer Satisfaction Score (CSAT)?," CMSWire,
Simpler Media Group, September 20, 2021,
https://www.cmswire.com/customer-experience/what-is-customer-satisfaction-score-csat/.
::::

:::: {#rf-020 .note}
::: title
:::

20\.

"Customer Effort Score (CES): Examples, Definition, and Calculations,"

Online Survey Software and Data Intelligence Blog

, QuestionPro, last modified December 16, 2021,
https://www.questionpro.com/blog/customer-effort-score/.
::::

# 

aided awareness

when a product, brand, or company list is provided to select from to
measure awareness

awareness

a consumer's familiarity with a product, brand, or company

causal research

studies that define a cause-and-effect relationship between two factors

census

when all potential target population members are included in the
research

convenience sample

a nonprobability sample type where potential respondents to the research
are selected by convenience rather than through any scientific method

cross tabulation

an analysis of two variables and the frequency of each answer in
relation to the other variable

customer acquisition cost

the total expenses a company spends to gain a new customer

customer effort score

a survey used to measure ease of service experience with an organization

customer satisfaction score

also known as a CES, a survey used to measure ease of service experience
with an organization

data analysis

the distillation of information into a more understandable and
actionable format

data collection

systematic gathering of information that addresses an identified problem

descriptive research

data collected to describe the situation in the market and help define
an opinion, attitude, or behavior

electronic surveys

surveys sent through digital means to respondents; respondents also
reply to the survey digitally

ethnographic research

method of collecting data that is conducted by observing people's
natural behavior

experimental research

studies that define a cause-and-effect relationship between two factors

exploratory research

research conducted that is more general to learn more about the industry
or market

focus group

a small group, typically 8 to 12 people, who are asked several questions
by a moderator and encouraged to build upon each other's responses

frequency

a report of the number of each answer received

infographic

a representation of data in a variety of visual presentations

in-person surveys

surveys conducted when the respondent and data collector are
face-to-face

judgment sample

a nonprobability sample type where the potential participants are
selected based on a perceived match to the sample frame

mailed surveys

surveys sent to potential participants through a mail service, such as
the US Postal Service

mean

an arithmetic average of values

mechanical observation

the use of electronic monitoring to record the actions of the observed

median

the middle number when all answers are organized from smallest to
largest; if an even number of data, the mean of the two middle answers
is the median

mode

the most common response

nonprobability sample

a situation which each member of the population has an unknown chance of
being selected to be part of the sample

observational research

data collected by watching consumers and recording actions

one-on-one interview

an interview that happens on an individual level between researcher and
respondent

personal observations

observations that are collected by human recorders

phone surveys

surveys conducted through the use of a telephone that can be completed
through digital or human methods

primary data

unique information that is collected by the researcher with the current
project in mind

probability sample

a sample in which everyone has a known chance of being included in the
research

problem definition

the realization that there is an issue that needs to be addressed

qualitative data

data that cannot be distilled into number of responses, such as
responses to an interview

qualitative research

data shared through words, descriptions, and open-ended comments

quantitative data

data that can be reduced to number of responses, such as number of
responses to each answer on a multiple-choice question

quantify the research

to take a variety of data and compile it into a quantity that is easily
understood

questionnaire

also known as a survey, a series of several questions that can collect a
variety of qualitative and quantitative data; can be distributed through
several different methods

sample

a portion of the entire population that is included in the research

sample frame

a parameter that defines who will be included in the sample and who
would not be included

sample size

the number of respondents that are to be included in the research

sampling unit

each individual entities that is included in the sample

secondary data

any research that was completed, within the organization or outside of
the organization, for another purpose

simple random sample

a type of probability sample where every entity has an equal chance of
being selected

stratified random sample

a probability sample type where the population is divided into groups
and then participants are selected from each stratum randomly

survey

also known as a questionnaire, a series of several questions that can
collect a variety of qualitative and quantitative data; can be
distributed through several different methods

syndicated data

a type of secondary data that is available through a subscription
service

target population

the group of people that are of interest for a study

unaided awareness

when no prompts or lists of potential products, brands, or companies are
given to test awareness

unobtrusive observation

a type of observation research where the observed is not aware they are
being monitored

verbatims

exact quotations of responses to a qualitative question
