m00037

86f81188-33dc-4dfb-bd28-d54a484b2c42

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Describe ethical issues relating to marketing research.

Discuss ways to avoid unethical research practices.

# The Use of Deceptive Practices {#sect-00002}

In marketing research, there are many potential areas of ethical
concern. Each day people share personal information on social media,
through company databases, and on mobile devices. So how do companies
make sure to remain ethical in decisions when it comes to this vast
amount of research data? It is essential that marketers balance the
benefits of having access to this data with the privacy of and concern
for all people they can impact.

Too many times, we have heard about the lack of ethical decision-making
when it comes to marketing research or personal data. Companies are
hacked, share or sell personal information, or use promotion disguised
as research. Each of these can be considered unethical.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
The Insights Association
:::

There is an organization devoted to the support and integrity of quality
marketing research. This organization, called The Insights Association
(IA), "protects and creates demand for the evolving insights and
analytics industry by promoting the indisputable role of insights in
driving business impact." Having a solid understanding of ethical
practices is critical for any marketing professional. Become familiar
with terminology, responsibilities, enforcements, and sanctions of the
[IA's code of standards and ethics](#).
::::

First, let's look at some deceptive practices that might be conducted
through research. The first is representing something as research when
it is really an attempt to sell a product. This is called sugging.
Sugging happens when an individual identifies themselves as a
researcher, collects some data, and then uses the data to suggest
specific purchases. According to the Insights Association Code of
Marketing Research Standards, researchers should always separate selling
of products from the research process.

Other deceptive research practices include using persuasive language to
encourage a participant to select a particular answer, misrepresenting
research data subjectively rather than objectively while presenting the
results, and padding research data with fabricated answers in order to
increase response rate or create a specific outcome.

# Invasion of Privacy {#sect-00003}

Privacy is another concern when it comes to marketing research data. For
researchers, privacy is maintaining the data of research participants
discretely and holding confidentiality. Many participants are hesitant
to give out identifying information for fear that the information will
leak, be tied back to them personally, or be used to steal their
identity. To help respondents overcome these concerns, researchers can
identify the research as being either confidential or anonymous.

Confidential data is when respondents share their identifying
information with the researcher, but the researcher does not share it
beyond that point. In this situation, the research may need some
identifier in order to match up previous information with the new
content---for instance, a customer number or membership number.
Anonymous data is when a respondent does not provide identifying
information at all, so there is no chance of being identified.
Researchers should always be careful with personal information, keeping
it behind a firewall, behind a password-protected screen, or physically
locked away.

# Breaches of Confidentiality {#sect-00004}

One of the most important ethical considerations for marketing
researchers is the concept of confidentiality of respondents'
information. In order to have a rich data set of information, very
personal information may be gathered. When a researcher uses that
information in an unethical manner, it is a breach of confidentiality.
Many research studies start with a statement of how the respondent's
information will be used and how the researcher will maintain
confidentiality. Companies may sell personal information, share contact
information of the respondents, or tie specific answers to a respondent.
These are all breaches of the confidentiality that researchers are held
accountable for.

Although we hear about how companies are utilizing customers' data
unethically, many companies operate in an ethical manner. One example is
the search engine DuckDuckGo. The search industry generates millions of
pieces of user data daily; most of the providers of searches capitalize
on this data by tracking and selling this information. Alternatively,
DuckDuckGo has decided NOT to track its users. Instead, it has built its
business model on the fact that no user information is stored---ever.
Ethically, DuckDuckGo offers users private searches, tracker blocking,
and site encryption. In an industry that is continuously collecting and
selling personal search information, DuckDuckGo is the exception. There
is no concern with being hacked because no data is collected.

:::: {#note-00007 .note}
::: title
Gallup
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

The [Gallup Organization](#) is a market research firm that specializes
in understanding market sentiment (see [\#](#)). Every year among its
numerous polls, Gallup completes an assessment of the honesty and
ethical approach of different professions. In the 2021 survey, nursing
was the top profession regarding these two measures.

Gallup's research led additional findings about the state of ethics for
businesses. "Ethical standards need to be at the core of an
organization's purpose, brand and culture." But what about Gallup's own
ethical standards? Gallup is "a global analytics and advice firm that
helps leaders and organizations solve their most pressing problems." In
order to be proficient and well-informed on the variety of topics Gallup
investigates, it must hold itself and its employees to a high ethical
standard.

Gallup completes multiple polls and research continuously. In order to
meet the high standards of its public, Gallup must perform these
practices in an ethical manner. Each step of the research process is
completed with diligence and intention. For those reasons, Gallup is
recognized for its ethically backed data. Gallup is a global leader in
market insights and has locations in seven cities within the United
States and an additional 27 locations internationally. According to
Chuck Hagel, former Secretary of Defense of the United States, "Gallup
is truly an island of independence---it possesses a credibility and
trust that hardly any institution has. A reputation for impartial, fair,
honest and superb work."
::::

#  {#sect-00005}

In this chapter, we discovered the critical nature of marketing research
on the success of a business. Big data, marketing intelligence, and
marketing information systems were defined, and each was explained
regarding its impact on the field of marketing research. Next, we
learned about the seven steps of the marketing research process and how
each step builds toward an actionable plan by management. The difference
between secondary and primary data was clarified, and several sources of
each were shared. Finally, ethical decision-making in research is
essential as some very detailed information about consumers is
collected.

#  {#sect-00006}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00007}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00008}

Complete the following information about the company and
products/services you chose to focus on for this marketing plan
exercise. You may need to conduct research to gather necessary
information.

Instructions: Using the Marketing Plan Template file you created from
[Marketing and Consumer Value](#) and expanded upon in [Strategic
Planning in Marketing](#) and [Market Segmentation, Targeting, and
Positioning](#), complete the following section of your marketing plan:
Current Market Situation/Situation Analysis.

Once complete, submit the marketing plan to your instructor for grading
and feedback.

#  {#sect-00009}

If you're a curious person, you may enjoy a career in data science,
marketing research, or consumer insights. Businesses report that there
is a growing need for data specialists---analysts, engineers,
scientists, translators, and cybersecurity managers---to grasp the power
of data insights to drive major business initiatives. Business
professionals across organizations depend on analytical know-how to make
informed decisions with real-time insights. Ongoing data evolution
requires data scientists to learn and adopt new technology to accelerate
organizational data strategies.

For budding professionals in the data science/consumer insights field,
it's essential to have foundational knowledge in applied mathematics,
statistics, data analytics and visualization, machine learning, computer
science, or data engineering. These may be courses you wish to add to
your upper-level academic work. You can also apply the resulting skill
sets to your brand as you investigate internships and projects. Keep in
mind that insights specialists must be able to communicate and present
complex findings to cross-functional teams clearly and succinctly,
driving data-driven decision-making from those findings.

Internal marketing departments generally rely on analysts to handle
business intelligence and data scientists to aggregate company data.
Read [this article to better understand the role differences](#) between
a marketing analyst and a data scientist. Review the differences in
salaries for [marketing analysts and data scientists here](#).

Now build a chart summarizing the skills necessary for both roles and
then identify which of those skills you feel you already possess and
which of those you need to work on. For those skills that you need to
develop, identify one or two steps you can take to add this to your
personal brand.

#  {#sect-00010}

Research is a part of many career paths for marketers and business
personnel. Financial planners, human resource managers, logistics
analysts, and marketing strategists all use research on a daily basis.
Most businesses now rely upon customer loyalty and product/service
ratings as they attempt to gain distinction among competitors. Many
companies now ask consumers to rate their products and services. That
rating is the next best thing to asking friends and family members for
product suggestions. Customers want proof that products or services are
reputable. Customer reviews are vital in providing personalized
experience and insights to promote customer relationships.

Speak to a consumer insights specialist from a local advertising agency
or a professor at your college or another university---especially one
who specializes in big data analytics---about the importance of data in
making marketing decisions. To find an insights specialist or professor,
conduct a Google and/or LinkedIn search. Also check out this list of
[top marketing professors on Twitter](#).

In your interview, you might ask the following questions, but be sure to
also include any questions you might have.

What is big data, and how do firms gather it?

How do companies I may be familiar with analyze and use data on a
regular basis to inform marketing efforts?

What are metrics, dashboards, and actionable goals?

I understand that employee turnover is a major consideration in customer
satisfaction these days. How does data analysis help companies measure
employee satisfaction?

Are there specific methods to gather information about customer
satisfaction?

I've received emails after making a purchase online, asking for my
feedback. How seriously is this feedback taken?

Can you give an example of how researchers may use primary and secondary
data?

Are there specific courses I should take if I'm interested in the data
side of marketing?

#  {#sect-00011}

## Nordstrom {#sect-00012}

One day a customer walked into an upscale fashion retail store in
Anchorage, Alaska, to return a set of tires. The store had a wide
selection of shoes, clothes, and accessories, but no tires. However, the
store that previously occupied the space did sell tires. After much
discussion, a Nordstrom store manager made the return and accepted the
tires. The story is legendary in customer service circles. It is also
true.

A leading fashion retailer based in Seattle, Washington, Nordstrom
prides itself on customer service and innovative methods of serving the
customer. Founded in 1901, the company now operates 358 retail stores in
the United States and Canada as well as online retail.

Nordstrom has long been famous for its customer-centric mindset. The
"Nordstrom way" has always been about serving customers according to
their needs and making them feel good about the shopping experience.
Part of the experience is focused on ease, selection, and convenience.

In 2020, Nordstrom saw tremendous growth in online sales. By integrating
online and in-store sales, the company realized that 50 percent of
customers who buy in store at Nordstrom have first had a digital
experience with the retailer. Identifying trends between in-store sales
and online sales has assisted Nordstrom in formulating a more
customer-centric strategy.

To better serve customers and increase sales, Nordstrom sales associates
are key. Sales associates develop connections with the customer. With
good questions and involvement in the customer experience, the sales
associates determine consumer needs and wants. Understanding consumer
needs and wants leads Nordstrom to craft an experience unparalleled in
retail.

Through careful study of the customer and the analytics available in
online and in-person shopping patterns, Nordstrom has developed a more
robust system that allows for seamless coordination between all
Nordstrom properties. In developing a better customer experience,
Nordstrom worked to really understand how customers live and behave.

From customer interactions, observation, online data, and careful
marketing research, Nordstrom Local emerged. One key piece of
information was that 35 percent of customers who place an online order
first visited a store to help guide the purchase decision. With Los
Angeles and New York as the top markets, Nordstrom needed methods to
connect with and help ease the purchase process for its customers in
these locations.

One significant aspect of the purchase process was to make online
ordering easier, allowing for quick in-store pickups and returns while
also including a method of getting alterations when and where it was
most convenient. The creation of Nordstrom Local was the answer. Through
a Nordstrom Local, available in the top markets, the customer could get
the Nordstrom experience---closer to home.

Nordstrom realized the more channels a customer could use, the more they
would spend with the retailer. In fact, soon after opening Nordstrom
Local, the company was able to determine that customers using the new
locations spend 2.5 times the amount of all other customers. So how
could the company better serve those customers and make transactions
more profitable?

Part of the Nordstrom plan to connect the customer more fully with the
"experience" included the ability to easily order online and pick up
in-store---using Nordstrom Local made that possibility easier to
achieve. Nordstrom Local also included tailors available at pickup, the
exclusive Nordstrom Stylist who would travel to all stores within a
local market area, easy returns and exchanges, and finally, Certified
Gift-Wrapping Specialists to make special packages look styled for
whatever the occasion.

Consumer insights help Nordstrom to provide curated merchandise for each
store. When shopping at Nordstrom, you will find merchandise specific to
the region and store location. Pop-up shops are a regular feature at
Nordstrom. The pop-up allows for a preview of potential merchandise to
meet the needs of the local market. A well-rounded plan to connect at
every point of contact has allowed Nordstrom to create an experience
unrivaled in the industry.

## Case Questions {#sect-00013}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00014}

:::: {#rf-021 .note}
::: title
:::

21\.

"IA Code of Standards & Ethics," (2021). Insights Association, November
2021,
https://www.insightsassociation.org/Tools-Resources/Codes-of-Standards.
::::

:::: {#rf-022 .note}
::: title
:::

22\.

Terry Masters, "Ethical Considerations of Marketing Research,"
Chron.com, Hearst, March 1, 2019,
https://smallbusiness.chron.com/ethical-considerations-marketing-research-43621.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-023 .note}
::: title
:::

23\.

Insights Association, "IA Code."
::::

:::: {#rf-024 .note}
::: title
:::

24\.

Masters, "Ethical Considerations."
::::

:::: {#rf-025 .note}
::: title
:::

25\.

DuckDuckGo (website), accessed November 20, 2021,
https://duckduckgo.com/.
::::

:::: {#rf-026 .note}
::: title
:::

26\.

Lydia Saad, "Military Brass, Judges among Professions at New Image
Lows," News, Gallup, January 12, 2022,
https://news.gallup.com/poll/388649/military-brass-judges-among-professions-new-image-lows.aspx.
::::

:::: {#rf-027 .note}
::: title
:::

27\.

Ghassan Khoury and Maria Semykoz, "The New Frontier of Business Ethics,"
Workplace, Gallup, February 6, 2019,
https://www.gallup.com/workplace/246197/new-frontier-business-ethics.aspx.
::::

:::: {#rf-028 .note}
::: title
:::

28\.

"About," Gallup, last modified June 1, 2022,
https://www.gallup.com/corporate/212381/who-we-are.aspx.
::::

:::: {#rf-029 .note}
::: title
:::

29\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-030 .note}
::: title
:::

30\.

Ken Worzel, "Market Strategy: Q&A with Ken Worzel," Press Releases,
Nordstrom, accessed March 30, 2022,
https://press.nordstrom.com/news-releases/news-release-details/local-market-strategy-qa-ken-worzel.
::::

:::: {#rf-031 .note}
::: title
:::

31\.

"Nordstrom to Host Virtual Investor Event on February 4," Press
Releases, Nordstrom, January 21, 2021,
https://press.nordstrom.com/news-releases/news-release-details/nordstrom-host-virtual-investor-event-february-4.
::::

:::: {#rf-032 .note}
::: title
:::

32\.

"Celebrating Our 120th Anniversary with WWD and Footwear News," Press
Releases, Nordstrom, accessed June 11, 2022,
https://press.nordstrom.com/news-releases/news-release-details/celebrating-our-120th-anniversary-wwd-and-footwear-news.
::::

:::: {#rf-033 .note}
::: title
:::

33\.

Christian Conte, "Nordstrom Customer Service Tales Not Just Legend,"

Jacksonville Business Journal

, September 7, 2012,
https://www.bizjournals.com/jacksonville/blog/retail_radar/2012/09/nordstrom-tales-of-legendary-customer.html.
::::

# 

anonymous data

data in which the respondent is not identified

breach of confidentiality

a situation where the researcher promises to hold private information
but discloses it in an unethical manner without permission

confidential data

data that is tied back to a respondent, but the respondent's personal
information is not shared

privacy

maintaining the data of research participants discretely and holding
confidentiality

sugging

suggesting a purchase disguised as research
