m00082

d3f88b35-b354-4e67-b46c-29a5f223e891

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Peloton started in 2012 with a group of ambitious people and the mission
to "use technology and design to connect the world through fitness,
empowering people to be the best version of themselves anywhere,
anytime." In 2019, Peloton, still a relatively new company, released a
holiday television ad that put it front and center in a very
controversial spot. The ad opens with a mother and daughter walking down
a set of stairs to open Christmas presents. You can see the snow outside
through the windows of the house. At the bottom of the stairs is her
husband waiting with a Christmas gift.

"A PELOTON?!?" she shrieks---but it isn't immediately clear if she is
happy with the gift. The commercial progresses with the mother
documenting her fitness journey. She rides after work. She rides early
in the morning. She rides through the seasons as you watch them change
through the windows of the house.

The audience watches as she records her fitness journey on her Peloton.
Toward the end of the ad, a Peloton instructor gives the young mother a
name in a workout class by saying "Let's go, Grace from Boston!" As the
commercial comes to an end, Grace shares her journey with her husband.
It turns out she was talking to him the whole time.

"A year ago, I didn't realize how much this would change me," she says,
now a true believer. After her year-long journey and her new "fit"
state, Grace thanks her husband for the gift and how it transformed her.

Consumers immediately took to social media to accuse Peloton of
promoting a negative body image, economic privilege, and archaic marital
relationships. The controversial ad sparked a significant spike in
social media engagement. The brand and the ad were widely publicized in
the media. The ad and the controversy definitely produced significant
brand awareness and an intense interest in the benefits of using a
Peloton.

Once the controversy died down, Peloton was a well-known brand name. And
with the lockdowns that came with the COVID-19 pandemic, consumers
around the world were seeking options for in-home exercise. Peloton was
poised to become the market leader with a reputation as a premier means
of in-home workouts.

Much of Peloton's success is a result of its robust integrated marketing
strategy. Consumers learn about Peloton through a variety of methods:
YouTube ads, television commercials, mall kiosks, social media posts,
and web content. Though the organization does its best to develop its
promotional messages, its best marketing strategy is the excellent word
of mouth and rave reviews from all its loyal and satisfied customers.
Using multiple avenues for reaching customers is known as an integrated
marketing communication strategy, the core concept that you'll learn
more about in this chapter.

Throughout 2020 and into 2021, during the height of the pandemic,
Peloton experienced a 172 percent increase in sales. But quick growth
can create other problems. As Peloton's popularity exploded during the
COVID-19 pandemic, management issues began to surface. In February of
2022, Peloton saw a 73 percent drop in its stock price, which led to the
ousting of founding partner and CEO John Foley. Marketing communications
can bring much-needed brand awareness, but it's been said that great
marketing can quickly kill a bad company. What is next for the
twice-named "CNBC Disrupter 50 Company"?

# Endnotes {#sect-00001}

:::: {#rf-001 .note}
::: title
:::

1\.

"The Peloton Story," Peloton, accessed June 30, 2022,
https://www.onepeloton.com/company.
::::

:::: {#rf-002 .note}
::: title
:::

2\.

Jordan Valinsky, "Peloton Sales Surge 172% as Pandemic Bolsters Home
Fitness Industry," CNN Business, Cable News Network, September 11, 2020,
https://www.cnn.com/2020/09/11/business/peloton-stock-earnings/index.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-003 .note}
::: title
:::

3\.

Ian Thomas, "The Fall of Peloton's John Foley and the Stock Market's Big
Founder Problem," CNBC, updated February 14, 2022,
https://www.cnbc.com/2022/02/12/the-fall-of-pelotons-john-foley-and-the-markets-big-founder-problem.html.
::::
