m00083

5e559ab0-3aa5-4740-be13-2982f99b2aa0

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define the promotion mix and explain its importance.

List and describe the elements of the promotion mix.

# What Is the Promotion Mix? {#sect-00002}

We are all consumers, and we have all been the target of promotional
campaigns. To connect with consumers of a target market, companies
conduct extensive market research so that they may better understand the
consumer. When companies understand the consumer, they can better
structure a message to appeal to the consumer and also find the best
channels for reaching the customer.

The created messages aim to get consumers' attention. Sometimes they
create awareness of a new event, a new product, a new idea, or a place
to visit. Sometimes they are asking consumers to make a purchase.
Marketing promotion is all around us.

According to the marketing firm Yankelovich Inc., the average digitally
connected person is exposed to around 5,000 ads per day. Among the
biggest promotional spenders in the United States is Disney. Disney
produces ads for everything from its movies and toys to its vacation
clubs and theme parks. While we should be flattered that these companies
are thinking of us and trying to figure out how to reach us and what
messages they should send, many consumers are busy trying to figure out
how to shut out the messages.

When you sit down to watch television, you are typically exposed to ads
that a company believes that you will respond to based on the research
it has done about the audience watching the show you tuned in to watch.
During your time scrolling through your news feed on Facebook, you are
being served ads that correspond to your Internet search history and
even products you may have mentioned while your phone was on and your
news feed open. Digital advertising relies heavily on algorithms of your
search history and site visits.

As recipients of these marketing messages, many consumers believe that
marketing is only advertising or sales. However, advertising and sales
are simply two options in a marketer's arsenal of communication tools
used to connect with the target market. Developing a marketing
communications strategy is something marketers should only do after they
have developed the rest of the marketing mix.

In fact, marketers have a wide variety of strategies to use from the
overall promotional mix (see [\#](#)). Most companies choose to use a
combination of the promotional mix methods to create an integrated
marketing communication message that reaches the customer in many
different ways. When the messaging is integrated, the consumer receives
the same message no matter which method of promotion is chosen. If the
consumer is watching the news and hears a story about the company or
product, public relations has impacted them. If they then scroll through
their social media accounts at the end of the day and they see an ad for
the same product, advertising has impacted them. When they sort through
their email and have a message from the company, they have received a
direct marketing communication.

No longer does promotion need to rely heavily on just one method of
marketing communication. Marketers can be much more targeted and more
cost-effective in the promotional methods they choose. Using a
combination of methods to send the same message allows the marketer to
be more strategic in their messaging and in their budgeting.

The best products are nothing until the consumer knows about them.
Without good promotion, the best products are just secrets. We all have
things we want to say, and on any given day we make phone calls, create
Instagram posts, upload TikTok videos, send emails, shoot off text
messages, and talk face-to-face with people. And just like us, marketers
also have things to say. Usually, they want to tell consumers about
their new brand extension of Reese's, a trade-in allowance for a new
Toyota Camry that just hit the car lot, or even a buy-one-get-one-free
promotion for your Starbucks latte. How marketers decide to say and send
the message is the promotion mix.

The promotion mix is the set of strategies marketers use to communicate
with their customers. With combined strategies, the promotion mix
creates a powerful method of connecting with the customer and conveying
all the other marketing mix elements for a holistic marketing approach.
The promotion mix allows marketers to reach customers in many different
ways, ensuring that the message is seen, heard, and understood. After
determining and defining the target market, creating a good product,
selecting a pricing strategy and optimal price, and deciding on the
distribution method, the marketer is ready to communicate with the
customer.

Messages sent by multiple methods provide a better opportunity for
consumers to see and hear the message and make the connection back to
the company. When a message is only sent by one method, the potential
for interference, noise, and avoidance is more likely to occur.
Marketers use a multichannel approach to send an integrated message.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

## Promotion Mix Defined {#sect-00003}

The full set of strategies that combine to make up the promotion mix
include advertising, sales promotion, personal selling, public
relations, direct marketing, and Internet/digital marketing. Each of
these methods is intended to produce different results when used.
Combining the elements creates an overall integrated message designed to
reach consumers at various points in their path to purchase. Marketers
call this integrated messaging integrated marketing communications.

## The Importance of the Promotion Mix {#sect-00004}

Of all the marketing mix variables, the promotion mix can be further
divided into different message channels that allow for connection and
communication with the customer. When the promotion connects with the
customer, it is the moment when all the marketing activities come
together. When the messaging and method of delivery reach the customer
and create the desired result, the marketing has achieved its purpose.

The strategies in the promotion mix provide the marketer with an arsenal
of methods to achieve their marketing objectives, such as increasing
sales or introducing a new product. However, consumers are bombarded
with marketing messages throughout the day, and these are combined with
the business of everyday life events like news, music, work, chores,
family, and friends. With this busy pace and activity, the consumer is
very difficult to reach. For the busy consumer, one communication method
alone is not likely to cut through the clutter and noise to reach them
and make an impact. Marketers must combine the various communication
elements to connect with the customer and meet the communication
objective.

# Elements of the Promotion Mix {#sect-00005}

When analyzed individually, each of the promotional mix elements is
powerful. They each have a part to play in the overall success of a
company. When combined and carefully executed, they create powerful
brands with legions of loyal fans and followers---the consumers. What do
each of these promotional mix elements do, and how do they contribute to
the whole process of connecting with the consumer?

## Advertising {#sect-00006}

Advertising is a multibillion-dollar industry. According to Statista, in
2020 alone, worldwide advertising spending reached \$586 billion.
Advertising is paid, nonpersonal communication from an identified source
that allows for creative messaging about all aspects of a product,
service, idea, person, or place. Consumers are able to quickly point to
advertising as a form of promotion. It is perhaps the element of the
promotional mix that we are most familiar with and the one we have been
most exposed to throughout every phase of our lives.

From our very first commercial showing how much fun it is to build with
LEGO to imagery of a toddler walking the Disney streets with a costumed
princess and Cinderella's castle in the foreground, we know what
advertising looks like. And while advertising can take many forms, it is
important to note that advertising consists of carefully designed
messaging from the company to the consumer. Advertising is meant to
produce a response in the viewer. And advertising is all about what the
company wants to tell us.

Advertising can be the pop-up window while we are doing a Google search.
It can be the Chick-fil-A billboard we pass every day on our way to
work. Advertising can be the trailer we watch before our movie starts.
And advertising can be the fun Doritos spots we look forward to during
the annual Super Bowl.

While advertising can be a costly means of communication with the
customer, it is relatively inexpensive based on the number of people
reached. When NBC priced the 2021 Super Bowl at \$6 million for a
30-second spot, with a record 96 million viewers, the price averaged out
to around \$0.06 per person reached.

Advertising is effective based on the frequency with which it is usually
viewed. And because of the media, the advertising message can usually be
repeated many times, depending on the budget. Due to its repeatability,
production costs have a better return on investment (ROI) the more an ad
is used, and the recall of the ad increases significantly.

## Sales Promotion {#sect-00007}

Most consumers love a sales promotion. It creates a feeling of
excitement and often includes a bit of a gaming experience into the
purchase decision. Marketers value the benefits of sales promotions
because the results are immediate and they have a wide variety of
options when using this promotional mix element. A sales promotion is a
method for a marketer to induce sales in the short term. Sales promotion
is not a long-term strategy but is geared toward specific calls to
action, typically aimed at getting the consumer to buy something
immediately or enter a sweepstakes or contest (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

Using sales promotions can be an effective method of getting the
consumer to try a product or buy more of a product, or it can be a way
to quickly deplete an inventory to make way for new products.

While sales promotions have many tactics that the marketer can employ,
several commonly used examples of sales promotion include the following:

Buy One Get One (BOGO)

. When

Domino's Pizza

offers the customer a free pizza when they buy a medium one-topping
pizza, this BOGO deal is used to get an immediate increase in sales for
Domino's pizza. Consumers may buy Domino's over other pizza brands
because they can get more pizza for their money.

Enter to Win

.

PepsiCo

needed to gain traction with the millennial audience. It needed to boost
the

Lay's

brand of potato chips and compete with new flavorful organic chips that
were getting market share in the category once dominated by Lay's. To
generate new interest in its brand, Lay's launched a campaign for
consumers to create a new flavor. New flavors could be entered, Lay's
would create samples, and the winner of the new chip flavor would win
\$1 million.

Coupons

. This method of promotion has come a long way with the use of
technology. While consumers are still able to "clip" coupons and redeem
them at the point of sale to receive savings on the products they are
buying, many companies are making coupons available through mobile apps
and discount codes to apply at the point of sale through an e-commerce
store. Using coupons is a great method of inducing trial of a new
product and increasing market share.

For National Ice Cream Day (see [\#](#)), Cumberland Farms wanted to
increase the sales of its house brand of ice cream, Ultimate Scoop. It
offered consumers a digital coupon for \$1 off a pint of the ice cream.
Cumberland Farms' existing customers received their coupon via text
message, and new customers could text in to get the coupon.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

Rebates

. Companies offer rebates to induce purchase and generally to receive
something in return besides the sale. When a rebate is offered for the
purchase of an Energy Star--certified product, the consumer gets a
designated dollar amount off the price of the product, and in turn they
must submit the proof of purchase along with identifying information
about themselves.

## Personal Selling {#sect-00008}

Personal selling is one of the most expensive forms of promotion because
it is a one-on-one, person-to-person form of communicating with the
customer. The role of the salesperson is to inform and persuade the
customer. This is usually done in what is termed an exchange situation.
The salesperson is exchanging knowledge and something of value, while
the customer is exchanging money for the item of value. Personal selling
is ideal for products that can be customized, are complex, and have a
relatively high price point.

Typically, personal selling is most often used in business-to-business
(B2B) markets. Business buyers have longer buying cycles, more complex
buying situations, and larger budgets. The pharmaceutical industry is
well-known for using personal selling. Company representatives must have
a high degree of training and knowledge about the products they are
selling to physicians and hospitals. It is also very common to have a
sales force to sell equipment and machinery to manufacturing plants.
Businesses rely on the knowledge and service of the sales force selling
them products.

In the business-to-consumer (B2C) market, personal selling is used for
items that cost more or items that have a high degree of variation. We
find sales representatives when we buy automobiles, home improvement
products, and insurance. The job of the sales representative is to
determine our needs and provide solutions that fill those needs.

When compared to advertising, which has a very general message directed
to a very large audience, personal selling is an individualized message
for one or several people within the buying group. When evaluating the
costs of personal selling, it is typically hundreds to thousands of
dollars per person reached.

The process of personal selling can be time-consuming. The process of
selling and the tasks of the sales force can be complex. The sales
professional is tasked with prospecting to identify the right customers
and then qualifying them to make certain they are a good fit for the
product.

It is not uncommon to hear people say, "You talk a good game. You could
sell to anyone." In reality, salespeople do not want to talk people into
a product. A good sales force only wants to sell to customers who want
and need the product. The best sales force knows that when the customer
is a good fit, they will bring repeat business and good word of mouth.

While some salespeople have a natural inclination for selling, others
are highly skilled with the technical knowledge of the products they are
selling. Understanding customers, the buying situation, and the product
being sold are a few of the skills needed to master the art of selling.
Good sales professionals know that the real work of the sale is to
service the needs of the client long after the sale has been made.

## Public Relations {#sect-00009}

Public relations is a nonpaid, nonpersonal form of promotion. Because it
is nonpaid, it has a high degree of credibility and is beneficial
because a typically credible, non-biased third party is the messenger.
While there are many tactics that marketers might use for public
relations, some of the most commonly used include press releases, press
conferences, events, and annual reports.

Many of the other promotional tools focus specifically on communication
with the customer. By contrast, public relations includes efforts to
work with the community where it operates, media, government officials,
educators, and potential investors.

When Nordstrom opened its flagship store in Manhattan, it unlocked the
doors a few days early for a VIP celebration that included Vogue's
editor, Anna Wintour, along with actresses, models, and designers. Some
of the noted attendees included Zoe Saldana, Katie Holmes, Olivia Wilde,
Karlie Kloss, Joan Smalls, Winnie Harlow, Tory Burch, Tommy Hilfiger,
and Stacey Bendet of Alice + Olivia. Guests formed long lines around the
store in an attempt to access the party.

TOMS shoes has long been a leader in cause marketing (see [\#](#)). When
you buy from TOMS, one-third of the profits go to Grassroot Good. TOMS'
annual report highlights the people the company helps and how it helps
them. Investors and any interested parties receive the annual report
that details the work TOMS does right along with the profits it is
making.

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

When celebrities wind up in the news, it is public relations, and it
works to keep their name before the public and their fans. So the
headline that hits the front page of the *New York Times* or is a
leading story on the NBC nightly news both create publicity for the
celebrity. Businesses also use publicity. A business might have a
product as part of a movie, such as BMW vehicles showing up in 37 of the
highest-grossing movies of 2018.

Public relations can also include crisis communication when negative
issues occur. One of the biggest public relations issues happened in
1982 to Tylenol. A malicious person or persons in the Chicago area
tampered with a few bottles of Tylenol Extra Strength capsules by
replacing the actual capsules with cyanide-laced capsules. Consumers who
unwittingly bought the Tylenol ended up dead. Johnson & Johnson, the
maker of Tylenol, was facing issues that could easily have destroyed its
business. The issue was the leading story for every news outlet.

Johnson & Johnson faced the issue head-on and made the bold move to have
Tylenol removed from all shelves. The recall resulted in the removal of
30 million products from store shelves. In the end Tylenol was a hero
and won the trust of a nation.

## Direct Marketing {#sect-00010}

Direct marketing allows for direct communication with the customer.
Messages can be tailored to specific market segments and even
personalized toward individual consumers. Early tactics of direct
marketing included telephone and mail; however, technology has allowed
for new methods of connecting with the customer to include text
messaging and email marketing.

In 2019, the Data & Marketing Association (DMA) reported that the direct
mail industry was valued at \$44.2 billion. It's the second largest
channel for ad spend in the United States, and it continues to grow.
Transformed by technology, direct marketing is finding new methods to
connect with the customer. Most connection includes a call to action
that provides for immediate feedback on the effectiveness of the method.

## Internet/Digital Marketing {#sect-00011}

Internet/digital marketing includes uses of technology to reach
customers at many different points of interaction. Marketers have at
their disposal a variety of methods to reach their customers and brand
products. Some of the tools include websites, landing pages, social
media pages, widgets, and customer relationship management (CRM)
systems. All the digital properties work together to drive traffic to
the branded properties and engage the consumers.

Digital marketing is geared toward very specific market segments and is
primarily interactive. Think of digital marketing as the mechanism that
produces the immediate interaction with the customer and produces some
type of feedback. Digital is considered two-way communication between
the company and the customer. During the early stages of launching the
SPANX brand, Sara Blakely primarily used digital marketing with a
heaving emphasis on social media. She involved her women friends who
were in her target market demographic and had them post about the brand
through their social media.

By contrast, Internet marketing is sending a message to a mass audience.
The Internet is used to for digital marketing and includes websites and
digital ads as well as the two-way communication of social media. Other
forms of digital marketing include mobile technology such as SMS and
mobile apps.

When a consumer completes a Google search for shoes and then jumps to
Facebook to scroll their feed and are served shoe ads from Nordstrom,
Macy's, and Steve Madden, they have been targeted by these shoe
companies. The targeting, immediacy, and changeability of the messaging
makes digital a quick and efficient method of reaching consumers.
Digital promotional tools are extremely effective and can cut through
the clutter and reach the consumer when they are in the demand phase of
the buying process and have signaled an intent to purchase.

According to a 2020 chief marketing officer (CMO) survey from Gartner,
two-thirds of promotional budgets are being spent on digital. Because of
the tremendous analytics available, marketers are able to assess the
effectiveness immediately. Messages can be tested for effectiveness and
quickly changed if they are not producing results. It is very difficult
to get the same quick feedback with any of the other forms of promotion.
Through careful tracking and robust customer relationship management
(CRM) systems, marketers are quickly able to promote products, increase
brand awareness, and move consumers down the sales funnel to instantly
purchase through online e-commerce sites.

Utilizing mobile app technology, marketers are able to push promotions
to customers while segmenting them by their behaviors and simultaneously
filling their CRM with insights and analytics that can help drive
promotions and sales.

:::: {#note-00013 .note}
::: title
Integrated Marketing Career
:::

An integrated marketing communications (IMC) professional builds and
manages campaigns that integrate all the facets of
marketing---advertising, public relations, digital campaigns, sales,
etc. If you're interested in this job role, [check out this article to
learn about the qualifications, experience, and salary](#). You can also
refer to programs offered by educational organizations that specialize
in integrated marketing. A few examples of those educational
organizations include [San Diego State University](#), [Marist](#),
[Northwestern](#), and Eastern Michigan University, to name a few. Check
[out this list for the Best Marketing Communication Colleges according
to Best Accredited Colleges](#).

Additional resources to explore include the following video:

IMC Careers from Northwestern's IMC director

[Integrated Marketing Communications (IMC) Careers](#)

Introduction to IMC geared toward marketing management students

[Integrated Marketing Campaigns - An introduction](#)

Evolution of IMC from Marist College

[Marist College: Evolution of Integrated Marketing Communication](#)
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00012}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00013}

:::: {#rf-004 .note}
::: title
:::

4\.

Sheree Johnson, "New Research Sheds Light on Daily Ad Exposures," SJ
Insights, September 29, 2014,
https://sjinsights.net/2014/09/29/new-research-sheds-light-on-daily-ad-exposures/.
::::

:::: {#rf-005 .note}
::: title
:::

5\.

"Largest Advertisers in the United States in 2020," Statista, accessed
June 15, 2022,
https://www.statista.com/statistics/275446/ad-spending-of-leading-advertisers-in-the-us/.
::::

:::: {#rf-006 .note}
::: title
:::

6\.

"Advertising Media Owners Revenue Worldwide from 2012 to 2026,"
Statista, accessed June 21, 2022,
https://www.statista.com/statistics/236943/global-advertising-spending/.
::::

:::: {#rf-007 .note}
::: title
:::

7\.

Brian Steinberg, "NBC Seeks Record \$6 Million for Super Bowl
Commercials (Exclusive),"

Variety

, June 16, 2021,
https://variety.com/2021/tv/news/super-bowl-commercials-price-record-1234998593/.
::::

:::: {#rf-008 .note}
::: title
:::

8\.

Isabelle Gustafson, "Cumberland Farms Offers National Ice Cream Day
Discount," CStore Decisions, WTWH Media, July 16, 2020,
https://cstoredecisions.com/2020/07/16/cumberland-farms-offers-national-ice-cream-day-discount/.
::::

:::: {#rf-009 .note}
::: title
:::

9\.

Tessa Trudeau, "Hello, New York! Nordstrom's New Manhattan Store,"
Nordstrom, accessed June 15, 2022,
https://www.nordstrom.com/browse/style-guide/fashion-news/events/nordstrom-opens-new-manhattan-store.
::::

:::: {#rf-010 .note}
::: title
:::

10\.

"Impact Overview," TOMS, accessed June 15, 2022,
https://www.toms.com/us/impact.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-011 .note}
::: title
:::

11\.

Ben Stewart and Maude Campbell, "Most Famous Movie Cars of All Time,"

Popular Mechanics

, March 22, 2022,
https://www.popularmechanics.com/cars/g625/top-10-movie-cars-of-all-time/.
::::

:::: {#rf-012 .note}
::: title
:::

12\.

Judith Rehak, "Tylenol Made a Hero of Johnson & Johnson: The Recall That
Started Them All,"

New York Times

, March 23, 2002,
https://www.nytimes.com/2002/03/23/your-money/IHT-tylenol-made-a-hero-of-johnson-johnson-the-recall-that-started.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-013 .note}
::: title
:::

13\.

Andrew Robinson, "What Is the Response Rate from Direct Mail
Campaigns?," DMA: Data & Marketing Association, May 21, 2021,
https://dma.org.uk/article/what-is-the-response-rate-from-direct-mail-campaigns.
::::

:::: {#rf-014 .note}
::: title
:::

14\.

Clare O'Connor, "How Spanx Became a Billion-Dollar Business without
Advertising,"

Forbes

, March 12, 2012,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/clareoconnor/2012/03/12/how-spanx-became-a-billion-dollar-business-without-advertising/.
::::

:::: {#rf-015 .note}
::: title
:::

15\.

Rama Ramaswami, "Gartner CMO Spend Survey 2020--2021: Technology and
Digital Channels Withstand Budget Cuts," Marketing Insights, Gartner,
August 17, 2020,
https://www.gartner.com/en/marketing/insights/articles/gartner-cmo-2020-2021-tech-digital-channels-withstand-budget-cuts.
::::

# 

advertising

a paid form of nonpersonal communication about a product, service, or
idea

buy one get one (BOGO)

promotion strategy in which consumers are offered the opportunity to buy
one product at regular price and get a second item free

coupons

sales promotion strategy that works to induce a consumer to buy a
product based on a price reduction

direct marketing

method of promotion that directly connects with the customer and
generally requires a response or transaction

enter to win

promotion strategy where consumers must complete entry requirements for
a chance to win something of value from a company

frequency

number of times the target market is exposed to a promotion

Internet/digital marketing

promotional method that utilizes the Internet and digital technology
such as text messaging, phone applications, and social media to reach
consumers

personal selling

one-to-one communication between the seller and the buyer; used to
inform and persuade the buyer

promotional mix elements

tactics to communicate with the customer including advertising, sales
promotion, personal selling, public relations, and direct marketing

promotion mix

tactics marketers use to communicate with the customer

public relations

nonpaid, nonpersonal communication

rebates

sales promotion strategy in which consumers must provide key information
to a company in exchange for dollars off the product

sales promotion

promotion that creates an incentive to purchase; provides for a fairly
immediate increase in sales in the short term
