m00084

eec996e4-a10c-4713-ad00-645eb4fca0e5

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Describe the communication process.

Identify and discuss each element of the communication process.

# Communication Process Defined {#sect-00002}

At first glance, the communication process seems simple. However, a
deeper look shows the complexity and issues that are involved with
communicating. When choosing how to send a message to the consumer, it
is important to understand how the communication process works. All
forms of marketing promotion are methods of communicating from the
company to the consumer. No matter which method of promotion you use,
the elements of the communication process are important to recognize and
consider.

Understanding how communication flows helps the marketer to create
better messaging, better media, and a response system that facilitates
the communication objective. Sending and receiving a message are only
two small parts of the complex system that marketers work with when
trying to send promotional messages to consumers.

Within the complex system of communicating are the variables of the
sender, encoding, messaging, media, the receiver, decoding, and the
feedback loop---all while contending with constant noise. Out of all the
elements of the communication process, only the sender, the encoding,
the message, and the media are in the marketer's control. All of the
other elements are outside of what marketing can control. Marketers must
understand all of the other aspects of the communication process to
mitigate the unknown and meet the campaign objectives.

When we consider communication, we are simply transmitting information.
On the granular level, the communication process is how the message gets
created, sent, and received. The elements of the communication process
are consistent no matter what the message is or how you choose to send
it. However, the variation in messaging, medium, and receiver all affect
the encoding process and the feedback loop (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# The Elements of the Communication Process {#sect-00003}

In order for communication to happen, it must go through a process. Both
personal and professional communication are comprised of several
elements that occur in order for the exchange of information to take
place. For communication to happen, there must be a sender of the
message and a receiver of the message. Between the sender and the
receiver is the message itself as well as the channel by which the
message is sent. All the variables in between include the elements that
are uncontrollable and, if not managed well, can cause issues. These
elements include the encoding and decoding of the message as well as the
noise that gets in the way and the feedback that helps us gauge the
success or failure of the message.

## The Sender {#sect-00004}

The sender is the source of the message. This can be the company, the
marketer, or the hired talent for a commercial. For example, when
PepsiCo signed a multiyear contract with Beyoncé to be a brand
ambassador, Pepsi made Beyoncé the sender of its messaging.

## Encoding {#sect-00005}

How the message gets developed is the creative process marketers go
through to put meaning behind the information they want to share with
their customer. The process of creating the message is known as
encoding. The process of putting the thoughts and ideas into words or
symbols is encoding. Encoding could be writing a press release,
developing a tag line, writing ad copy, creating a jingle, or designing
a brand symbol. How a marketer chooses to encode the message should be
dependent on the characteristics of the audience.

## The Message {#sect-00006}

From the encoding process, a message is developed. For marketers, the
goal is to have the message reflect the value the product provides to
the consumer. When Nike tells its customers to "Just Do It," it has
created a message. Dove's "Real Beauty" campaign created a message that
beauty comes in many different forms.

## The Medium {#sect-00007}

Once the marketer has the message developed, they need to send it. The
medium is how the message is delivered. The message could be sent
through the television in the form of an advertisement or a news story.
The message could travel to the customer through an email directly in
the customer's inbox. Or the message could be a salesperson describing
why the new Ford Broncos are safe and dependable.

## The Receiver {#sect-00008}

In marketing, the customer is generally the receiver. However, messaging
can also be delivered to groups and organizations. When Comcast develops
its annual report and sends it to its group of investors, the investors
are the receivers of the message. If Chick-fil-A creates a billboard
saying to "Eat More Chicken," the travelers passing the billboard are
the receivers.

## Decoding {#sect-00009}

Decoding is the process of unpacking the message and giving it meaning.
It is the receiver's understanding of the message that has been sent.
Many things affect the process of decoding, some of which include the
receiver's knowledge and experience. To create the most effective
messages and delivery, the marketer needs to have extensive research
about and understanding of the receiver. When the consumer hears the
message "Red Bull gives you wiings," the company (sender) wants to
convey that the product will give the customer (receiver) the energy to
do whatever they want to do. If the receiver believes that they can
actually fly after drinking Red Bull, there was an error in the decoding
process.

## Feedback {#sect-00010}

The feedback loop tells the sender if the receiver understood the
message as they were intending it when they encoded the message.
Feedback is the checkpoint on a specific call to action. It can be a
return email, a click to a website, or a purchase using a coupon. When
the feedback loop is complete, the marketer has data regarding the
communication process.

Personal selling has the richest method of feedback. If the salesperson
is in front of the receiver and can hear their voice when they respond
and can see their body language, they have a complete understanding of
whether the encoding was effective when the decoding takes place. If the
marketer sends a coupon to a consumer via a mobile app and the consumer
redeems the coupon at the point of purchase, the redemption is the
feedback loop for the sales promotion.

## Noise {#sect-00011}

In the communication process, many elements are outside of the
marketer's control. The biggest factor that can be a point of conflict
for the marketer is the noise that interferes with the receiver's
ability to get the message, decode it, and provide feedback. All the
elements that get in the way of the receiver getting the message are
noise. Noise can be the distractions that happen while the ad plays
during an episode of *Seal Team*---things such as getting a snack,
talking to a family member or friend, or surfing channels just as the ad
is playing. Noise can be the other thousands of messages targeting the
same receiver and vying for their attention.

The marketer's job is to understand the various sources of noise and
work to create encoding and mediums that will help to reduce the
interference. It is typically believed that because of all the noise
that exists, the receiver must be exposed to the message on average
7--10 times before they take action toward the message.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00012}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00013}

:::: {#rf-016 .note}
::: title
:::

16\.

Meghan Casserly, "Beyoncé's \$50 Million Pepsi Deal Takes Creative Cues
from Jay Z,"

Forbes

, December 10, 2012,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/meghancasserly/2012/12/10/beyonce-knowles-50-million-pepsi-deal-takes-creative-cues-from-jay-z/.
::::

# 

decoding

method of transforming and interpreting a message

encoding

process of putting ideas and thoughts into a transmittable form

feedback loop

notification that the message has been received between the sender and
the receiver

medium

various methods of communicating with a target audience; may include
broadcast, print, outdoor, and other forms

noise

unplanned distractions that interfere with the communication between a
sender and a receiver

receiver

intended message recipient

sender

source of a message; can be an organization or person
