m00085

9154fe93-088b-44b7-9b1a-112eda4c2c85

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define integrated marketing communications (IMC).

Discuss why IMC is important in marketing.

# Integrated Marketing Communications (IMC) Defined {#sect-00002}

Now that you are familiar with the various forms of marketing
promotions, how do you use them? Because consumers are all
different---no matter how they fit into your target market---it is
important to reach them through a combined approach, using a variety of
the methods in the marketing promotion mix.

The method of using various forms of the promotional mix to send the
same message to the target audience is called integrated marketing
communications.

# Importance of IMC in Marketing {#sect-00003}

If a group of friends is planning to go out to dinner, as the group
organizer you may find it best to text some friends and call others. The
message is the same: "Let's meet for dinner at Chipotle at 6:00 p.m."
The methods of communication are different depending on the traits and
characteristics of the group. This works similarly in marketing.
Marketers have many forms of communicating through the various methods
available in the promotional mix. However, it is important to send the
same message in different ways to reach different customers within the
target market. And consumers need to hear the same message many times
and in many different forms.

## Benefits of IMC {#sect-00004}

Benefits of an integrated marketing campaign are many. As a marketer
seeks to create awareness, stimulate demand, or even encourage product
trial, they are continuously seeking methods of cutting through the
clutter and noise and trying to reach their intended audience---the
customer. When using one method, they may reach a few customers; when
using two or more methods, the odds begin to increase; and when using
all of their available promotional mix methods to reach the consumer
with a consistent message, marketing becomes more effective. The
benefits of the integrated approach are significant.

## Better Results {#sect-00005}

Without an integrated approach, the marketing message and methods of
delivery will be disjointed. Different members of the marketing team may
be sending very different messages to the consumer. The consumer will
then be confused as to what they should do. Think of it as a bike with
all the pieces lying on the sidewalk---the bike doesn't work very well.
However, when the pieces all come together to form the bike, it glides
smoothly along the sidewalk. It is the same when the message comes
together.

When Taco Bell (see [\#](#)) wants to tell the consumer that the Grilled
Steak Burrito is only available for a limited time, it can send the
message many different ways. The consumer soon knows the Grilled Steak
Burrito is only available for a limited time. They have received the
same message through ads on television and radio, an email, a photo and
reminder on Instagram, and a billboard on their way to work. After
receiving the same message in many different ways, the consumer realizes
there is some urgency in getting to Taco Bell to try the new Grilled
Steak Burrito. When the customer is in physical proximity to their local
Taco Bell, apps such as RetailMeNot can send push notifications to
customers when they pass the location. The offer can include BOGO or
other promotions to convince the customer the time to purchase a Grilled
Steak Burrito meal is now.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

## Increased Efficiency {#sect-00006}

Having streamlined communication channels all working toward a unified
goal reduces waste and increases productivity. The marketing effort
should not create divergent messaging. Through integrated marketing
communications, the creation of a clear and simple message allows the
marketing team to focus on the single message while each team member
uses their skills to push the message through their unique
specialization, be it public relations or advertising. Everyone comes
together through a shared goal.

## Improved Brand Awareness {#sect-00007}

You can tell a small child to brush their teeth multiple times, and
chances are good it still won't happen. But when a parent tells the
child to brush their teeth, the dentist provides them with a toothbrush
and tells them to brush their teeth, and Elmo shows them the importance
of brushing their teeth, soon the child understands that it is a good
idea to brush their teeth. The same thing happens when Southwest
Airlines publishes all of its fares and fees on its website, broadcasts
ads on television and radio, send emails to its Southwest Rapid Rewards
customers, and advertises on its mobile app (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

## Repeated Success {#sect-00008}

Through the use of an integrated approach, marketers are finding
repeated success. Success is generally based on the metrics chosen for
the campaign objectives. Typically, marketers are concerned with
objectives such as return on investment, cost per impression, cost per
lead, and customer lifetime value. With a truly integrated campaign, you
will see the objectives remain the same while the execution strategies
change across the various promotional methods.

## Customer Satisfaction {#sect-00009}

When customers know the brand promise and they hear it repeated often
with increased company connection, customers are more educated and have
more realistic expectations. The combination of connection and knowledge
leads to increased customer satisfaction.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00010}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# 

integrated marketing communications

development and execution of multiple promotional methods that include a
coordinated message
