m00086

ae893fe2-e216-4c22-a54d-a9badd2c5632

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

List the steps in the IMC planning process.

Summarize the details of each step in IMC planning.

# Identify the Target Audience {#sect-00002}

All successful IMC campaigns start with a good foundation and a
carefully written and executed plan. Every step in the marketing process
should be driven by research; the same is true for the IMC planning
process (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Understanding the audience is integral to creating an effective IMC
campaign. Using a variety of tools, marketers are able to identify the
target audience. The more that is known about the target audience, the
higher the likelihood is of making sure the message is coded correctly
and the right medium for effective encoding and reduced noise is chosen.

Marketers employ many tools to understand the target audience. Both
primary and secondary marketing research can provide significant
insights. A clear understanding of the consumer allows the marketer to
create messages that resonate with the needs and wants of the target
audience.

# Determine the Marketing Communications Objectives {#sect-00003}

Marketing campaigns must start with clear objectives. Objectives define
what needs to be done, and they help to keep the strategy and tactics
clearly aligned. Good objectives will help marketers create cohesive
messaging across all the promotional mix methods. Objectives need to be
simple, and they should be written in such a way that they provide
opportunity for analysis. If done correctly, marketers should be able to
analyze if the messaging and the medium are working. When creating
objectives, follow the SMART guidelines: simple, measurable, actionable,
realistic, and time-bound.

## The 5A Framework {#sect-00004}

The 5A framework is the map of the customer's needs. Through the 5A
framework (see [\#](#)), marketers create messaging that moves the
customer through the funnel, or customer journey with the brand. The 5As
provide the marketer with clear steps on the role of the messaging at
each step of the framework.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

Let's look at the five steps of the 5A framework in more detail:

Aware

: The first stage in the customer journey with any product is to be
aware that the product exists. It is difficult for a product to be
desired by the customer if they don't know about it.

When Angel Johnson launched her activewear company ICONI, she needed to
stand out from more popular and well-funded activewear brands. As a
Black woman--owned business, Angel wanted to appeal to other women, many
of whom needed different types of activewear. Angel found success in
creating awareness through running ads on Amazon, where customers could
easily find and purchase her products.

Appeal:

After becoming aware that a product exists, the consumer must gain some
understanding of what the product can do for them. If the benefits are
favorable for the consumer, they may put it in their consideration set
of things that appeal to them.

Ask:

After the appeal stage, the consumer may become motivated to actively
seek out information about the product. When the consumer asks the
company about the product, they have opened the channels of
communication. This is part of the feedback loop. Methods of asking
include the consumer engaging online through a chatbot or a contact form
or by calling a listed phone number.

Act:

Further down the customer journey funnel, if the customer has received
information and they feel it is favorable, then they will act. The
action can be to either purchase the product or not purchase the
product. Either form of action must be evaluated by the marketing team.
The marketer can determine if the messaging created a favorable or
unfavorable reaction and then modify the messaging for the segment that
acted not to buy the product.

Advocacy:

At the bottom of the funnel is the marketer's holy grail---the consumer
becomes a loyal customer. The marketer can begin to calculate lifetime
value, but most importantly the consumer becomes an advocate for the
product. Through their advocacy, the consumer provides positive word of
mouth and encourages purchase by other consumers.

# Design the Message {#sect-00005}

A key element of integrated marketing communications is creating the
message. Messages are designed to fulfill the established objectives.
Depending upon the objective and the desired action of the consumer, the
marketer may create the message to meet the various stages in the
customer journey and have a call to action.

The biggest part of the message design is the content of the message. To
move the consumer to the point where they act, marketers have at their
disposal various forms of appeal. The appeal is the approach used to
attract the attention of the target audience or to persuade it to take
action.

# Create the Message Content {#sect-00006}

When creating the message, the marketer has to consider not only the
stage of the customer journey, but the product's features and benefits
as well. Other factors to consider in the message content include the
media and the traits and characteristics of the target market. All of
the segmentation bases should be considered when creating the appeal.

## Rational Appeals {#sect-00007}

When Toyota advertises the features of alternative-fuel vehicles and
tells the consumer how those features benefit them, it is creating a
rational appeal (see [\#](#)). Rational appeals prompt the consumer to
make the choice for the product because of all the ways they will
benefit from using it.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

## Emotional Appeals {#sect-00008}

Consumers have a wide variety of emotions. Advertising messages can play
to all those emotions. A few of the typical emotional appeals include
happiness, fear, trust, sadness, anger, and guilt. It can be quite
effective to create fear if the customer doesn't purchase the product.
Some examples of common fear appeals include skin care products and the
fear of the effects of aging on skin. Vitamins and supplements use the
fear of being unhealthy. And automobiles promote the fear of not being
safe in a crash unless you drive a certain brand with a good crash-test
rating.

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
Happiness Campaign
:::

Coca-Cola (see [\#](#)) wanted to associate drinking a Coke with being
happy and created a whole campaign on the emotion of happiness.
Everything in the campaign was focused on drinking Coke and choosing to
be happy. They created the #choosehappiness hashtag to be used in their
social and digital promotions. Consumers would include their pictures
drinking a Coke with friends and add #choosehappiness. Check out this
commercial from the campaign.

[Coca-Cola Happiness advertising campaign \"Choose Happiness\" -
produced by AG Films](#)
::::

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

Public health campaigns often rely on fear appeals (see [\#](#)). If you
continue a behavior there may well be negative consequences, which can
arouse fear in the consumer. These campaigns seek to change behavior
through fear. Fear appeals can be very effective in some circumstances.

<figure id="fig-00005">

</figure>

## Moral Appeals {#sect-00009}

A moral appeal pushes the consumer to want the product because of a
sense of morality or social good (see [\#](#)). The messaging may
encourage the consumer to do the "right thing." If they don't do what is
being asked of them, the situation will get worse.

<figure id="fig-00006">

</figure>

## Message Structure {#sect-00010}

Promotional messages generally have common elements, which include a
slogan, the text or content, and the graphics. The graphics can include
photos and brand identification. Messages can tell stories with words or
lead the audience to their own conclusion based on the graphics.

When Apple first promoted its iPod, the company used the imagery of a
very colorful background, a completely black silhouette, and the stark
contrast of the all-white iPod with white headphones. The graphic alone
conveyed the message that the iPod would allow consumers to "jam" to
their own tunes through this new device.

## Message Format {#sect-00011}

The format of the message depends largely on the media being used to
send the message. For example, a television ad combines sight and sound,
while radio is reliant only on sound. The same is true for print,
billboards, and various digital campaigns. Formatting the message needs
to take into consideration the target market as well as the medium of
the message.

# Determine the Budget {#sect-00012}

Promotional budgets are determined based on many variables. In
developing the promotional budget, it is important to consider where the
consumer is in their journey. Additional considerations include the
current level of brand awareness for the product, accessibility of the
target market, creation of the promotion, and specific media under
consideration. There are several commonly used methods of creating
promotional budgets.

Objective and Task:

This is perhaps the best method but is often used the least. With
objective and task, the marketer determines the objectives of the IMC
campaign and what tasks need to be done in order to complete the
objectives. The tasks are priced, and the level of reach (number of
consumers who will see the message) and the frequency (the number of
times the consumer will see the message) are estimated. Based on the
tasks necessary to achieve the campaign objectives, the budget is
established.

Top Down:

With a top-down budgeting approach, the IMC campaign budget is issued
from the operating budget based on input from the executives responsible
for setting the budgets. While this method takes into consideration the
overall organization, it pays little heed to the needs of the specific
campaign.

Percent of Sales:

While personal selling is one of the methods included in the promotional
mix, it is not the only method. A percent-of-sales approach attributes
sales to all the functions of marketing. Generally, an organization may
provide an arbitrary percent of overall sales as the total budget for
the marketing promotions. Because many issues affect the sale of a
product, it is difficult to make sales the only determinant of the
marketing activities and the promotional methods.

Affordable:

The affordable method allocates only the amount of money the company can
provide to a marketing budget. This method does not create a mindset of
growth within the organization. A robust marketing strategy is focused
on the growth of the organization. Affordable only provides for what is
left over after all the other expenses have been allocated.

Competitive Parity:

If you were to look at the advertising budgets of competitors in the
same industry, you might very likely see that they are spending similar
amounts on a very similar promotional mix. Companies of every size
closely monitor the promotional activities of their competitors. With
the competitive parity method of budgeting, the allocations essentially
mirror whatever the closest competitor is spending on promotions. This
method of budgeting doesn't allow for increased market share.

# Develop Strategies and Tactics {#sect-00013}

The promotional strategies include the promotional methods the marketer
chooses in order to achieve the objectives. Within the promotional
methods, the tactics are the specifics the marketer must use to achieve
the objectives. For example, if Panera Bread wants a 10 percent increase
in brand awareness for its decorated Christmas sugar cookies from
November 26 to December 30, it may choose to use the following strategy
and corresponding tactics:

A strategy might be to create an Internet/digital messaging campaign
focused on creating awareness with a message to try the Panera Christmas
sugar cookies for a limited time. The tactics might then be developed as
follows:

Develop push ads through the Panera Bread mobile app

Publish pop-up banner ads through Google

Post campaign messages in Instagram

Post campaign messages in Facebook

# Select the Promotional Tools {#sect-00014}

The marketer must decide on the mix of promotional tools based on the
established marketing objectives. Choosing the mix of promotional
methods is also primarily dependent on the consumer and how best to
reach them.

When Timmy Global Health, a not-for-profit organization, wanted to do an
end-of-year fundraising ask, it chose to reach its donor base through
direct mail. The organization chose an email campaign for the segment of
its market that is responsive to email and has an email address in the
CRM system. For a small segment of its market, those who are older and
not responsive to digital marketing, it chose to do a direct mail
campaign with a postcard mailed through the US Postal Service.

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
Direct Mail Examples
:::

There are hundreds of examples where companies have used direct mail
campaigns in their promotional mix. Check out some [of the best as
referenced in this article](#).
::::

# Designing the Promotion {#sect-00015}

In considering the target market and the message to send, the marketer
must think of the desired response. Three important issues arise in the
design of the promotion: what to say (message), how to say it
(creative), and who should say it (source). This leads the marketer to
the overall message strategy, which will look at the appeal as it
relates to the brand positioning. A marketer will consider the following
in designing a promotion:

Message Strategy:

A good

message strategy

must tie the brand to the target audience. What will appeal to them?
What action do you want them to take? How does the brand positioning
need to be portrayed? The marketer may choose to highlight how the
product compares to the competition (points of parity), or the marketer
may choose to focus on how the product is different (points of
difference). In doing so, it is important to showcase the product or
service through the value it will bring to the target market.
Ultimately, the customer wants to know "What's in it for me?"

Creative Strategy:

Through a

creative strategy

, the marketer is able to translate their message into words, images,
and sounds. If the message and the creative do not match up, the
communication objectives may miss their mark. The creative strategy
helps the marketer cut through the clutter and get the attention of the
target audience. A properly done creative strategy serves as the guiding
principles to develop good content.

Communication Channel:

Think of the

communication channel

as the delivery mechanism, taking the message from the company to the
consumer. Determining which channel is generally guided by the audience,
the message, and the creative strategy. Channels can be nonpersonal or
personal. The channel options are as varied as the consumers themselves.

Personal communication channels can include social networks like
friends, family, and neighbors. They can also include paid or unpaid
experts and even the company's own sales force. Nonpersonal
communication channels include everything from television and radio to
billboards and direct mail.

In designing the promotion, the marketer can mix and match the message,
creative, and communication strategies until they have the right
combination to execute on their objectives and connect with the target
market.

For example, when World Food Championships wanted to reach home cooks,
professional chefs, and aspiring chefs to participate in its Food Sport
events, it enticed them with the opportunity for a big payout in
winnings. And it created a connection with them through smaller local
qualifying events. When the winners of smaller events received a Golden
Ticket to compete, they were instantly excited. Then they realized the
competition would allow them to meet with even bigger food celebrities
and increase their chances of television fame (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00007">

</figure>

## Scheduling the Promotion {#sect-00016}

Knowing when to promote and how often to promote is a critical juncture
in the promotional process. For scheduling purposes, it is important to
understand the complexity of the message and the medium or channel for
delivery. If the average of 5,000 promotional messages a day is correct,
the consumer will need to see a message many times in order to become
aware and act. To move them down through the customer journey, the
message has to cut through the clutter and stick.

Reach is the number of consumers who will be exposed to the promotional
message at any given time. Frequency is the number of times the consumer
will be exposed to the message. Using the combination of reach times
frequency, the marketer is able to determine the promotional schedule.
Marketers typically work to create promotional schedules that optimize
the exposure to the target market. Once again, we see that having
extensive knowledge of the target market is critical to creating
effective campaigns. There are three promotional schedules a marketer
may consider:

Continuous:

With a

continuous promotional schedule

, the marketer will conduct the promotion year-round on a very regular
schedule. Consumers will continuously see the ads.

Flighting

: Through a

flighting promotional schedule

, the marketer will run a period of heavy promotions and then go for a
period of time without any promotional messaging. The idea is to give
the target market a break and avoid potential wear-out of the message.

Pulsing:

If you see promotions on a regular basis and then suddenly you see them
a lot during certain seasons, the sender is using a

pulsing schedule

.

For example, let's consider the television commercial for MyPillow.
Throughout a broadcast, the MyPillow commercial plays two or three
times. The commercial plays every night on one broadcast station.
However, during holiday seasons, the commercial plays more often. The
commercial is often accompanied by a special code. With the code,
viewers can receive a discount on the pillows. The viewer gets a
discount, and MyPillow receives analytics to determine if its budget for
this commercial television time is effective. In this example, MyPillow
is utilizing a pulsing schedule for its promotional efforts.

# Evaluate and Measure the Objectives {#sect-00017}

Before starting a promotional campaign, marketers must establish
objectives. Including measurable and time-bound objectives is important.
The marketer must evaluate the campaign on a continual basis to ensure
that every element in the campaign is working to achieve the objective.
Measuring and evaluating the campaign on a continual basis allows the
marketer to evaluate the elements and make changes. Typically,
objectives also have financial accountability. Changing elements of a
campaign avoids overspending on components that are not working to meet
the objectives.

Some common key performance indicators (KPIs) for evaluating promotional
campaigns include the following:

return on investment

cost per lead

cost per sale

conversion

engagement

Digital promotional campaigns allow marketers to track many analytics in
real time and have the ability to make changes to the campaign in real
time. The advantages of digital media include a host of valuable
analytics, such as the following:

website traffic

page views

bounce rate

conversion rate

impressions

cost per click

:::: {#note-00005 .note}
::: title
ROCI
:::

IMC is centered on data-driven decision-making to drive organizational
value. So it's no surprise that the founder of IMC, Don Schultz,
determined a way to measure IMC campaigns. Schultz calls this metric
return on customer investment (ROCI). ROCI is a marginal analysis that
shows the efficiency of marketing communications spending. We often
think of effectiveness as the key measure of a campaign's success. But
equally important is the efficiency of how we spend resources. We should
consider how hard our resource works for us.

We should also be concerned about how well our investment does in the
short term and the long term. After all, we are trying to build
financial returns for our organizations. ROCI looks at short- and
long-term value by considering the change in profitability and value
during the period and overall.

IMC considers all aspects of the marketing communications relationship,
not just a single campaign. The ROCI metric looks at how revenue grows
over time and not just in response to one action.

The formula for ROCI is as follows:

$$\text{ROCI~=~Profit~from~Customer~in~Current~Period~+~}\frac{\text{Change~in~the~Customer’s~Value~in~Period}}{\text{Customer’s~Value~at~the~Beginning~of~the~Period}}$$

*Let's say we own an ice cream shop and we are interested in the
efficiency of our recent IMC campaign. So, we decide to conduct an ROCI
calculation for an average customer using the following data. What is
the ROCI?*

  -------------------------------------------------- ---------
  Profit from the customer in the current period     \$38.00
  Change in customer's value in the current period   \$10.00
  Customer's value at the beginning of the period    \$21.00
  -------------------------------------------------- ---------

\$38.48

*Last period, the ROCI was \$37.50. What factors might impact the change
from the previous period to this period?*

ROCI considers all aspects of the IMC relationship, so as the
relationship grows, the ROCI does as well.

*What is the value of the ROCI calculation?*

It determines the marketing communication campaigns that yield the most
profitable customers.
::::

:::: {#note-00006 .note}
::: title
Don Schultz
:::

Hear from Dr. Schultz directly about IMC trends in this video.

[Don Schultz on IMC trends](#)
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00018}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00019}

:::: {#rf-017 .note}
::: title
:::

17\.

Matt Miller, "Angel Johnson's Gym Mishap Turned into the Thriving
Activewear Brand ICONI," Amazon Ads, Amazon, March 28, 2022,
https://advertising.amazon.com/en-us/blog/iconi-by-angel-johnson-and-the-black-business-accelerator/.
::::

:::: {#rf-018 .note}
::: title
:::

18\.

https://www.timmyglobalhealth.org/;
https://www.shoutoutstudio.com/timmy-global-health/
::::

# 

5A framework

map of the consumer's various need states as they find out about a
product and finally decide to purchase

communication channel

delivery mechanism that takes the message from the company to the
consumer

continuous promotional schedule

process of conducting promotions year-round on a regular schedule

creative strategy

method of translating a message into words, images, and sounds

emotional appeals

advertising messages that appeal to human emotions

fear appeals

campaigns that seek to change behavior through fear

flighting promotion schedule

process of running a period of heavy promotions and then going for a
period of time without any promotional messaging

key performance indicators (KPIs)

methods of evaluating promotional campaigns

message strategy

method of developing a message based on how the message will best tie
the brand to the target market

moral appeal

information communicated to the consumer to appeal to their sense of
right and wrong

pulsing schedule

process of running steady promotions followed by a period of heavy
promotions

rational appeals

information communicated to the consumer based on how they will benefit

return on customer investment (ROCI)

a marginal analysis that shows the efficiency of marketing communication
spending
