m00087

9b4f5766-1ca0-463e-b05a-bd4d30b7e67f

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify ethical issues with respect to marketing communications.

Discuss ways to maintain and foster ethical marketing communications.

# Socially Responsible Marketing Communications {#sect-00002}

While some argue that marketing makes people buy things they don't want,
marketing cannot *make* someone buy something. The adage "buyer beware"
still holds true. And while there are stories of rogue marketers not
holding to the American Marketing Association (AMA) code of ethics,
ultimately marketers want lifetime customers. The lifetime customer is
easier to educate, more agreeable, and generally a good word-of-mouth
testament for the company. It is difficult to get and keep customers
without ethical marketing.

Marketers look to self-regulation as the first line of defense. It is in
the marketer's best interest to always maintain a code of ethics in
order to serve their customers and grow their organization. Good brands
are always built on trust.

After self-regulation, there is regulation by trade associations,
followed by federal regulation. The federal agencies with oversight for
marketing promotions include the following:

Federal Trade Commission (FTC)

.

The FTC maintains oversight of commercial speech, unfair methods of
competition, and deceptive advertising.

Federal Communications Commission (FCC)

.

The FCC regulates broadcast communication and has jurisdiction over the
radio, television, and telephone sectors.

Food and Drug Administration (FDA)

.

This organization has authority over labeling, packaging, branding,
ingredients lists, and advertising of packaged foods, pharmaceutical
products, and cosmetics.

CAN-SPAM Act

.

This regulation monitors commercial email practices and is one of the
prominent regulations that affect many marketers across industries.

Companies have realized that when they are socially responsible, it
benefits many of their customers, their communities, the environment,
and their shareholders. Customers have come to expect more from the
companies they purchase from, and they want to support companies that
"do good." When companies support and sponsor programs and charities
that are important to their customers, their customers in turn support
them.

In 2021, Subaru celebrated 14 years of its Share the Love event. To
celebrate this event, it debuted a national ad campaign highlighting the
people, places, and pets that have been impacted by its social
responsibility. Charities supported by Subaru include the American
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA), Make-A-Wish
Foundation, Meals on Wheels America, and the National Park Foundation.
In its advertising, Subaru also showcases some of the local
charities---selected by Subaru retailers---that benefit from the Subaru
Share the Love event, as well as the impact of the automaker's work with
Feeding America to help address food insecurity.

# Maintaining and Fostering Ethical Marketing Communications {#sect-00003}

Ethical marketing communications includes avoiding activities that could
mislead consumers---communication such as withholding information,
making misleading claims, and misstating information. In an effort to
make products be all that a consumer would want from them, marketers can
easily go down the slippery slope that leads to ethical missteps. To
make sure marketing communication doesn't follow any of the common
unethical practices, it is important to be aware of two of the most used
and violated ethical issues:

Puffery

is when marketers exaggerate at extreme levels. For example, a marketer
may say that a product is "10x stronger than the competition." This is
an unethical statement unless the marketer can support this claim
through independent research from a third-party firm. Using general
terms such as "awesome," "fabulous," and "best" are all acceptable, but
making specific statements crosses the ethics threshold.

Paid sponsorship

is when a person promoting a product is paid by the company to make an
endorsement. We've all seen the political ads describing who has paid
for the ad and who has endorsed the ad. When we see a television
commercial and it has a Ford truck driving over rugged terrain and we
hear "Built Ford Tough," we are certain the ad was paid for and
sponsored by the

Ford Motor Company

. However, if we scroll through

Instagram

and we see one of our favorite Instagram accounts using the new Babyliss
Pro Titanium Flat Iron for their styling hair, and they are extolling
its many great features, we cannot be sure if this Instagram account
simply really likes the flat iron or if they are a paid influencer. Paid
influencers must disclose their relationship to the brand so the
consumer is notified that the endorsement of the product is a business
arrangement. Disclosing paid sponsorship is a big issue, particularly
for advertorials, native advertising, paid links, influencer marketing,
affiliate marketing, and any "pay for play" content.

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
Farmer Direct Organic
:::

This group of farmers in Canada and the United States banded together to
provide better food and better prices. The mission of Farmer Direct
Organic is not only to grow better food but to change the way consumers
think about food and how they eat. The farmers who participate in the
cooperative are focused on quality and transparency. All of their food
is 100 percent organic and 100 percent farmer owned.

Through its Facebook and Pinterest accounts, Farmer Direct Organic
showcases the family farms that grow the food it sells. Consumers can
purchase Farmer Direct Organic at Fresh Market and Whole Foods locations
throughout North America. In keeping with its mission to help consumers
eat better food, the company shares recipes and serving suggestions on
social media and the organization's website.

With a vision of a "food future that is good for you, for your family,
for farmers, and for the planet," Farmer Direct Organic carefully
monitors the food that bears its brand, and it has an unwavering
commitment to pesticide monitoring, transparency, and traceability from
the store back to the farm that grew the food that is now on your table.
::::

#  {#sect-00004}

After the marketer has facilitated all the other marketing mix
variables, they are ready to communicate with their intended target
audience. Marketers have a set of promotional methods for communicating.
This chapter explores the various methods of communication along with
modeling the communication process.

Throughout the chapter we explore the various promotional methods:
advertising, personal selling, sales promotion, public relations, direct
marketing, and internet and digital marketing. The communication process
has multiple steps: sender, receivers, message, medium, encoding,
decoding, feedback, and noise. To get messages through the process, it
is important for the marketer to have an extensive understanding of the
intended target audience.

To reach the target audience and build value for an organization, the
marketer typically sends a consistent message through multiple
promotional methods; this is called integrated marketing communications
(IMC).

#  {#sect-00005}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00006}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00007}

One of the key ways that you can build your personal brand is by
association. The following is a list of marketing associations. Research
each of these to determine which organization(s) are most congruent with
your goals. Many of these organizations have local chapters that you can
join, where you can attend a function, or that you can simply use to
gather additional information. These are great ways to network with
other marketing professionals, organizations, and industry leaders. From
this association you can continue to develop a network of peers that you
can gather information, experiences, and ideas from.

American Advertising Federation (AAF) is a leading professional
organization that includes members across all disciplines and career
levels in advertising.

American Marketing Association (AMA) is the largest marketing
association in North America with more than 30,000 members globally.

Association of National Advertisers (ANA) is a leading marketing and
advertising organization.

Association of International Product Marketing and Management (AIPMM) is
a membership-based professional organization for product managers, brand
managers, and more.

Association of Network Marketing Professionals (ANMP) is the premier
association uniting network marketing professionals worldwide.

Legal Marketing Association (LMA) is the universal voice of the legal
marketing and business development profession.

Social Media Association (SMA) informs, inspires, and empowers business
through social, digital, and future media.

Society for Marketing Professional Services (SMPS) is for marketing and
business development professionals in the architecture, engineering, and
construction industry.

#  {#sect-00008}

Using the same list of marketing associations above, contact the one
that interests you the most and ask if it is possible to speak with a
member. Explain that you are a student and you would like to interview
someone in the field. Before the interview, consider what information
you would like to leave the interview with. Below is a list to get you
started, but be sure to add anything else that the list does not contain
and be prepared to ask follow-up questions for clarity.

Tell me about yourself. What is your education, how long have you held
this position, and how did you get here?

Can you outline your current job?

What does your typical day look like?

What do you like best and least?

What is the biggest challenge of this position?

What does a career path look like from where you are now?

#  {#sect-00009}

Complete the following information about the company and
products/services you chose to focus on as you develop the marketing
plan throughout the course. You may need to conduct research in order to
obtain necessary information.

Instructions: Using the Marketing Plan Template file you created from
the [Marketing and Customer Value](#) assignment and expanded upon in
[Strategic Planning in Marketing](#), [Market Segmentation, Targeting,
and Positioning](#), [Marketing Research and Market Intelligence](#),
[Products: Consumer Offerings](#), and [Pricing Products and
Services](#), complete the following section of your marketing plan:

Marketing Strategy: Promotion

Submit the marketing plan to your instructor for grading and feedback.

#  {#sect-00010}

## Little Debbie {#sect-00011}

Part of your childhood nostalgia may include the Little Debbie Oatmeal
Creme Pie, Nutty Buddy, or Swiss Roll. These much-loved products are
from the family bakery known as McKee Foods. The company was founded in
1934 by O. D. and Ruth McKee. The company started out as Jack's Cookie
Company, a small bakery in Chattanooga, Tennessee, that was bought by
the couple to provide convenient snacks for school lunches.

Prior to McKee Foods, bakery or snack cake items were not individually
wrapped and sold in a multipack carton. The snack cake brand was named
Little Debbie after the founders' granddaughter. Her image is still the
famous logo on all packaging. Back in the 1960s, a carton of 12 cakes
and cookies had a suggested retail price of 49 cents.

Among the company's brands are Little Debbie, Sunbelt Bakery, Drake's
Cakes, and Fieldstone Bakery. The largest brand is Little Debbie, with a
wide range of favorites from Apple Fruit Pies to Zebra Cakes. Little
Debbie offers seasonal items in rotation, such as Christmas Tree Cakes.
Distribution extends to all 50 states, Mexico, and Canada.

The Little Debbie brand of products is widely available in grocery
stores, convenience stores, and vending machines. The company has many
best-selling products that are pantry mainstays in households throughout
the markets they serve. Because the company is such an American icon,
the products evoke a sense of nostalgia in many consumers. One such
product: Christmas Tree Cakes. Debuting in 1985, the beloved product can
be found on shelves to celebrate Christmas and is widely anticipated by
consumers around the start of the Thanksgiving season. It is one of the
best-selling holiday treats.

For the 2021 holiday season, Little Debbie launched a new Christmas
treat, Christmas Tree Cake Ice Cream. To create this new confection,
Little Debbie partnered with Hudsonville Ice Cream, a Michigan-based
company that has been in business for over 90 years. The new product
launched with a great deal of media attention. Public relations were in
full swing with articles in newspapers across the country as well as
trial of the product on live news broadcasts. Additional headlines
appeared in digital media outlets to amplify the message that this new
treat was available in stores for the holidays "while supplies last."

Little Debbie featured the product in its social media with release
information on all of its channels starting in October, well ahead of
the holiday selling season. The company has a robust social media
presence with over two million fans on Facebook, 85,000 followers on
Instagram, and 200,000 followers on Twitter. The likes, shares, and
positive comments had social media buzzing in anticipation of this new
product.

## Case Questions {#sect-00012}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00013}

:::: {#rf-019 .note}
::: title
:::

19\.

"Share the Love," Subaru of America, last modified May 26, 2022,
https://www.subaru.com/our-commitment/share-the-love.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-020 .note}
::: title
:::

20\.

Subaru of America, "Subaru Share the Love Event Returns for Fourteenth
Consecutive Year," News Releases, Cision, October 18, 2021,
https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/subaru-share-the-love-event-returns-for-fourteenth-consecutive-year-301402491.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-021 .note}
::: title
:::

21\.

"About Farmer Direct Organic," Farmer Direct Organic, accessed June 21,
2022, https://fdorganic.com/pages/about.
::::

:::: {#rf-022 .note}
::: title
:::

22\.

Chrissy Callahan, "Little Debbie Is Turning Its Famous Christmas Tree
Cakes into Ice Cream," Today, NBC Universal,
https://www.today.com/food/little-debbie-christmas-tree-cakes-are-now-ice-cream-flavor-t234396.
::::

:::: {#rf-023 .note}
::: title
:::

23\.

"This Is McKee;" McKee: A Family Bakery,
https://mckeefoods.com/1/this-is-mckee; "Our History," McKee: A Family
Bakery, https://mckeefoods.com/105/our-history; "Who We Are," Little
Debbie, https://www.littledebbie.com/6/who-we-are
::::

# 

paid sponsorship

when a person promoting a product is paid by the company to make the
endorsement

puffery

providing unrealistic and unsubstantiated claims about a product
