m00020

70c8f0ba-95c5-49f1-aca4-dbdb4b735b14

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Say hello to RingCentral, a company that provides businesses with
cloud-based business communications solutions that include messaging,
video meetings, phone, and an omnichannel cloud contact center.
RingCentral, a business-to-business (B2B) company, partnered with
Medallia, a customer feedback management software platform. Soon after
implementing Medallia, RingCentral was able to obtain important insights
about product innovation and was able to turn that feedback into product
features and customer retention.

How did it do that? First, with direct access to customer feedback, the
product teams at RingCentral can use that feedback to spur product
feature innovations that meet customers' needs. Second, the company's
sales and support teams were able to use that same customer feedback to
tweak their training programs and support processes. The results? After
rolling out the dashboards (visual displays of the information
captured), the company's support team reached an average customer
satisfaction (CSAT) score of 9/10 in two key market segments. "Without
real time customer feedback and the opportunity to close the loop with
the customer when the feedback is fresh, this score would have been much
more difficult," said Chad Freeman, RingCentral's customer support
director.

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
RingCentral
:::

To learn more about RingCentral's business model, watch this video of
Jim Cramer, from CNBC's show *Mad Money*, interviewing RingCentral's
CEO.

[RingCentral CEO: Communication in the Cloud? \| Mad Money \| CNBC](#)
::::

# Endnotes {#sect-00001}

:::: {#rf-001 .note}
::: title
:::

1\.

"RingCentral Case Study," Medallia, accessed September 29, 2021,
https://www.medallia.com/customers/ringcentral/.
::::
