m00021

1b158746-07f1-49b5-aff4-c87cd5e21a08

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define the business-to-business (B2B) market.

Distinguish characteristics of the B2B market versus the
business-to-consumer (B2C) market.

Business-to-business (B2B) is a marketing transaction or business
conducted between businesses. It refers to businesses that sell products
and/or services to other businesses, such as retailers or wholesalers,
rather than to consumers. These transactions can include everything from
materials used in manufacturing to office supplies or furniture and
everything in between. B2B's "counterpart" is what's known as B2C, or
business-to-consumer. The focus in B2C transactions is selling products,
goods, and services to consumers for personal use.

Many businesses have both B2B and B2C components. For example, consider
Office Depot. You may have stopped into an Office Depot store before the
semester to stock up on pens, a ream of paper for your printer, or
notebooks. That's a B2C transaction. However, a large law firm or an
accounting firm might order hundreds of reams of copy paper, folders,
and print cartridges from Office Depot. That's a B2B transaction.

# Characteristics of the B2B Market {#sect-00002}

B2B markets differ from B2C markets in several ways (see [\#](#)). Let's
take a closer look at each of these differences.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Business-to-Consumer Market (B2C)   Business-to-Business Market (B2B)
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  Buying decisions for individuals    Buying decisions for companies that
  and/or households                   serve consumers or other companies

  Smaller purchases/many buyers       Larger purchases/fewer buyers

  Direct demand                       Derived demand

  Shorter buying decision cycles      Longer, more complex buying
                                      decision cycles

  More reliance on mass marketing     More reliance on personal selling

  Many customers located throughout   Fewer customers, often
  the world                           geographically concentrated in
                                      areas based on cost, access, and
                                      availability of resources
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Differences between Consumer Markets/Buyers and Business-to-Business
  Markets/Buyers {#table-00001}

Nature of the buying decision

. It may seem a little obvious, but it's important to remember that B2C
buyers generally make buying decisions for themselves or their
households, whereas B2B buyers make buying decisions for their
companies, which serve either consumers or other companies. When you go
grocery shopping, you're buying a loaf of bread, a gallon of milk, and a
dozen eggs for yourself or your household. However, if you are buying
food to be prepared and served at a large hospital or a university, the
complexity and volume of that purchase will be far greater.

Fewer buyers, higher volume

. Another difference between the two markets is that B2B markets deal
with fewer buyers, who purchase a much higher volume than the B2C
market. For example, when

Barnes & Noble

sells textbooks to students, the potential market includes hundreds of
thousands of students worldwide. These students purchase one or more
textbooks for their semester's classes. However, Barnes & Noble is just
one commercial buyer purchasing those hundreds of thousands of
textbooks.

Direct demand versus derived demand

. Another difference between the two markets lies in the nature of the
demand for products. B2C markets are driven by

direct demand

, the demand for goods and services for direct consumption purposes. By
contrast, B2B markets are driven by what's known as

derived demand

, in that demand in the B2B market is dictated by the demand for
consumer goods on the B2C market. For example, as more workers are
working from their homes, the demand for computers has risen. As a
result, you'll see derived demand in computer-related products, such as
mice, monitors, printers, and so on.

Longer buying cycles

. As a general rule, the higher the dollar volume of the sale and the
more complex the product, the longer it takes for the sale to be made.
As a consumer in the B2C market, you might buy a desktop computer within
a relatively short time after deciding that you need a new computer. In
the B2B market, a hospital purchasing a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
machine may well be spending millions of dollars, and the sale can take
months or even years to accomplish. Not only will there be more people
involved in the decision-making process, but the hospital needs to be
concerned with many factors, such as safety, reliability, and
post-purchase service. A lot of time and effort is typically required to
"close the deal" with a big-ticket item like an MRI machine. We'll be
examining the stages in the B2B buying process in depth later in this
chapter, but the B2B buying process is typically longer and more
complex, not only because of the involvement of different decision
makers, but also because these decision makers must consider a wide
range of factors when making high-volume or high-dollar purchases.

Reliance on personal selling

. Whereas B2C markets tend to rely more heavily on mass marketing, B2B
markets typically are characterized by increased reliance on personal
selling. Additionally, B2B purchasing is more likely to involve complex
negotiations concerning price, delivery schedules, technical
specifications, etc., so personal selling plays a vital role. Typically,
because B2B buyers and sellers often need to work together to define
problems and implement solutions, they focus on building long-term
relationships rather than a one-and-done purchase. For example, it took
nearly four years to negotiate the contract, but the Indian government
and

Airbus

finally reached agreement on the purchase of 56 Airbus C295MW tactical
transport aircraft from Airbus.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Geographical concentration

. Finally, the scope of the market is different. In the B2C market, you
have millions of potential customers dispersed throughout a region, a
country, or perhaps the world. On the other hand, the B2B market is more
concentrated. The B2B market has far fewer customers that are often
geographically concentrated in areas based on cost, access, and
availability of resources. Detroit (the heart of the US automotive
industry) and Silicon Valley (home to many technology-based companies)
are prime examples.

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
B2B Jobs
:::

If you're considering marketing for your job, B2B marketing is a career
choice. Why would you want to go this path? Read this [article from the
author of *B2B Marketing Strategy*](#). If you're not entirely sure what
a B2B marketer would do, read this [article on HubSpot](#) to gain
insight into the job role.

If you're still not quite clear on what B2B marketing is and how it
differs from B2C, read this [article from Business News Daily](#) to
gain more information. Get a sense for what the work looks like by
[using LinkedIn for B2B marketing](#).
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00003}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00004}

:::: {#rf-002 .note}
::: title
:::

2\.

Gastón Dubois, (2021, September 8). "Indian Government Approves Purchase
of 56 Airbus C295MW for Its Air Force," Aviacionline.com, published
August 9, 2021,
https://www.aviacionline.com/2021/09/indian-government-approves-purchase-of-56-airbus-c295mw-for-its-air-force/.
::::

# 

business-to-business (B2B)

a transaction or business conducted between one business and another

derived demand

market demand for a good or service that results from a demand for a
related good or service

direct demand

the demand for a commodity for direct consumption purposes
