m00022

e0b4b09f-c467-4995-a505-ccf5c4fd0510

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify the types of buyers involved in the B2B market.

Describe the types of buying situations that exist in the B2B market.

List and describe the parties who participate in the B2B buying process.

# Types of Buyers in the B2B Market {#sect-00002}

The B2B marketplace is populated by many different types of buyers, each
with their own requirements, policies, and procedures. Some B2B buyers
(known as *producers*) purchase goods in the B2B market so they can
produce other goods to be sold to other businesses or consumers. Other
B2B buyers (known as resellers) purchase goods in the B2B market so they
can resell, rent, or lease those goods or services. Still other B2B
customers, such as the government and nonprofit institutions such as the
Wounded Warrior Project, the Salvation Army, churches, and charities,
purchase goods to serve the public in some way. These types of buyers
are shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Producers are companies that purchase goods and services that are
transformed into other products, and they include both manufacturers and
service providers. For example, in one of its divisions, Emerson
Electric produces electronic controls for the heating, ventilating, and
air conditioning (HVAC) industry. Its buyers need to purchase
capacitors, printed circuit boards, resistors, diodes, and dozens of
other components in order to build those controls. Burger King needs
beef patties, buns, lettuce, pickles, and other ingredients to make its
sandwiches. Your local tattoo shop needs tattoo ink and needles. You've
likely bought a smartphone. Imagine the dozens of components that go
into the product's manufacturing---circuit boards, LCDs, speakers,
microphones, batteries, etc. The producer needs to purchase these
components from various vendors. This is a large market for B2B sellers,
because producers don't typically buy in small quantities. For example,
OSI supplies 45 million pounds of steak, salsa, beans, and other food
products for Chipotle and has been supplying meat to McDonald's for over
50 years. From a marketing perspective, that's the kind of B2B
relationship you want to pursue!

Resellers sell goods and services produced by other companies without
any material change. These resellers include retailers, wholesalers, and
brokers. This is a very important segment in the B2B market because
these resellers typically buy in large volumes, so if marketers can
convince these resellers to stock their organization's products, it can
mean a significant uptick in sales. We'll learn more about retailers,
wholesalers, and brokers in [Distribution: Delivering Customer
Value](#), when we talk about distribution, but some quick definitions
may help here. Retailers are businesses that sell goods to consumers in
relatively small quantities for personal consumption. Walmart and Target
are two big retailers you're likely familiar with, but even the
convenience store across from campus buys a variety of products, like
candy, snacks, and soft drinks, from wholesalers to make them available
for purchase---unaltered---by you. Wholesalers, on the other hand,
typically purchase larger quantities from producers and then resell them
to retailers. Brokers bring buyers and sellers together (for a
commission, of course), and they may represent many producers of
noncompeting products.

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
Alibaba
:::

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

Founded in 1999 by Jack Ma, Alibaba.com is an online B2B marketplace
(see [\#](#)). In this virtual marketplace, buyers and sellers have the
ability to connect with one another and carry out purchase/sale
transactions. Alibaba is sort of like a giant variety store for B2B
buyers. The company has hundreds of millions of products in over 40
different categories, including machinery, consumer electronics, and
apparel.

Alibaba's B2B marketplace has millions of sellers, similar to eBay in
the B2C market. The sheer number of sellers translates to millions of
products to choose from, so B2B buyers can easily select the sellers and
products that best suit their needs.

Many of Alibaba's suppliers are businesses that sell raw materials or
manufactured goods, and the B2B buyers of these goods are typically
retailers, wholesalers, sourcing agents, or manufacturers who source
products for reselling for their own businesses (see [\#](#)).
Alibaba.com even has "Pay Later" options (backed by Kabbage Funding) so
that buyers can purchase inventory, even if they don't have immediate
funds available. This "Pay Later" option helps B2B buyers avoid more
complicated financing options.

For more information about Alibaba.com, watch this CNBC video.

[What is Alibaba? \| CNBC Explains](#)
::::

Trivia question for you: Who is the largest purchaser of goods and
services in the world? If you answered the US government, you'd be
correct. Government markets make up the largest single business and
organizational market in the United States. The US government buys
everything you can imagine, from paper clips and staples to tanks,
weapons, and jets. But it's not only products that governments purchase.
They also enter into contracts with companies that provide services to
citizens---everything from transportation to garbage collection and
construction services.

You might be interested to know that there isn't one central department
within the government that purchases all these products. Organizations
that want to sell to the US government must first register with the
System for Award Management and then consult with the General Services
Administration (GSA), the agency that is charged with assisting hundreds
of federal agencies that procure a vast array of routinely purchased
products such as office supplies, vehicles, and information technology
services. However, the savvy marketer knows that agencies don't buy
products; people do. The agencies the GSA works with still have
influence over what is purchased, so the marketer knows to contact each
agency the organization wants to do business with and market its
products to them.

*Institutions* is a rather broad term for nonprofit organizations such
as the Wounded Warrior Project and Ronald McDonald House Charities,
charities, and churches, as well as educational institutions, hospitals,
museums, nursing homes, and civic clubs. Like the government, these
institutions often purchase large quantities of products and services.
For example, a large nursing home buys food, beverages, linens,
janitorial supplies, medications, and a host of other products and
services to serve its residents. Similarly, a church may purchase
candles, vestments, furniture, and much more.

A smart B2B marketer will carefully examine all of the markets mentioned
above to determine if they represent significant potential
opportunities, as well as looking at pursuing B2B opportunities abroad
and online B2B markets.

# Major Types of Buying Situations in the B2B Market {#sect-00003}

As a consumer, you face different types of buying situations every day.
Some purchases you make are almost automatic and made with little
forethought, such as when you stop for a cup of coffee on your way to
work or class. Other buying decisions you make take more time and
effort. The same is true in the B2B market. Buy classes refer to buying
situations that are differentiated in terms of four characteristics:
newness (i.e., how familiar or unfamiliar the product is to the B2B
buyer), how many alternatives can/should be evaluated, how much
uncertainty is involved in the buying situation, and how much
information is required to make the buying decision.

In the B2B market, there are four different types of buy classes. You
can see the buy classes in [\#](#).

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

Straight rebuys are the simplest buying situation for a B2B buyer. With
a straight rebuy, the B2B buyer is making a routine purchase of a
standard product or products with no modifications from a familiar
supplier. An example of a straight rebuy would be a B2B buyer who orders
copier paper, pens, and pencils from Office Depot or another local
office supplier. That buyer has likely purchased these (or similar)
products before, so the amount of effort involved in a straight rebuy is
minimal beyond confirming that the order has been fulfilled.

In a modified rebuy situation, the B2B buyer is looking to purchase a
similar product, but there are one or more significant differences from
the previous purchase, such as new product specifications or a new
supplier. Modified rebuy situations typically involve more effort on the
part of the B2B buyer than straight rebuys because they have to consider
product specifications, evaluate vendors, and negotiate new contracts.
For example, let's consider a restaurateur who has changed the logo of
the restaurant, necessitating buying new menus, coffee cups, and paper
napkins. In essence, the same products are being purchased as
before---menus, coffee cups and napkins---but the logo has changed. This
might be the time for the restaurateur to look at different suppliers
who may offer better pricing or cups in a different size and shape to
better display the new logo. A modified rebuy situation involves more
effort than a straight rebuy situation because the restaurateur is
likely going to need to research product specifications, evaluate
vendors, and possibly negotiate new contracts.

The new-task buy occurs when a B2B buyer buys a product or service for
the first time. These buying situations are among the most difficult and
time-consuming ones because typically the B2B buyer has no previous
experience with the product, the service, or perhaps the vendors. This
means that, instead of relying on past purchase orders or product
specifications, the B2B buyer has to start from scratch and do
considerable research in terms of product specifications, find out which
firms supply the product, and obtain information on the quality,
pricing, delivery, and customer service of each of these vendors. For
example, if Whirlpool designs a new microwave oven, the B2B buyer will
have to source new vendors to design an electronic control panel for
this microwave.

Systems selling (sometimes called a solution sale) involves buying a
complete solution to a problem or need rather than purchasing separate
components from different vendors. For example, a B2B buyer may choose
to purchase an entire human resource management system from one supplier
rather than purchasing applicant and/or employee management software
from one vendor, payroll software from another vendor, compensation and
benefits management software from still another vendor, etc. and putting
them together.

# Participants in the B2B Purchase Process {#sect-00004}

Think about how you make buying decisions in your household. You're
likely the only decision maker involved in minor purchases, such as
groceries or personal clothing. If you're buying a bigger-ticket item
such as a new car or a flatscreen TV, you may involve other members of
your household in the decision. That's typically not the case in B2B
buying. The decision-making unit of a buying organization is referred to
as the buying center, sometimes called a decision-making unit. Buying
centers are comprised of all of the different people in the organization
who have a stake in the B2B buying decision and have some degree of
influence in the purchasing decision. The buying center can have one or
more of the following roles, as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

The initiator is typically the individual who first identifies a
purchasing need within the organization. Initiators are the people
within the buying center who start (or initiate) the buying process. For
example, a machine operator might initiate a request for a particular
tool or piece of equipment, or the payroll department may initiate a
request for new payroll software. At other times, the need may be
identified by senior management or the engineering department.

Influencers are those within the organization who help define
specifications and/or provide information to be used in the evaluation
process. Simply put, these are the people in the organization who
influence the buying situation and provide information for strategically
evaluating alternatives. Influencers may not have a direct role in the
purchasing decision, but they wield influence over the purchase. There
are two categories of influencers. Business influencers typically focus
on how the purchase impacts revenue, whereas technical influencers will
generally focus on how the purchase will impact business processes and
operations.

Gatekeepers filter information. The gatekeeper is the person the
marketer has to negotiate their way through in order to reach the
decision makers. Gatekeepers play a strategic role in the buying
process, because they have the ability to allow only that information
favorable to their opinion to flow to the decision makers. For example,
an executive assistant might have control of the decision maker's
appointment calendar and might tell the marketer, "There are no openings
on the calendar at this time."

Buyers are those who have authority within the organization to select
suppliers and negotiate and arrange the purchase terms. Buyers may also
assist others within the organization to help shape product
specifications, but their primary role is selecting vendors and
negotiating the terms of the contract. They are also responsible for
issuing purchase orders, following up, and keeping track of deliveries.

:::: {#note-00011 .note}
::: title
Being a Buyer
:::

Interested in learning more about what a buyer does on the job? Read
this [Indeed.com article](#) about the roles, responsibilities, salary,
and education of a buyer. The article also includes steps to become a
buyer. Also read this article from [*The Princeton Review* on the life
of a buyer](#).
::::

Deciders are the critical link for a marketer in getting the order,
particularly in major purchases. These are the people within the
organization who have the authority to select or approve the final
suppliers. B2B buyers may be the deciders for routine purchases (i.e.,
straight rebuys), but in more complex purchases, decisions are often
made higher up in the organization.

Users are those people within the organization who will actually use the
product or service. These users may or may not be the initiators of the
purchase proposal. However, depending on how complex the purchase is,
they may help define product specifications.

It's important to note that not all of these parties may be involved in
every buying decision, depending on the nature of the purchase, and
sometimes people in the buying center play more than one role. For
example, consider a medium-sized law firm that needs a new copier. The
initiator may be an administrative assistant (who is also a user) who
complains to their boss, the managing partner, that the copier is too
slow and lacks features like auto-duplexing and the capacity to enlarge
and reduce the size of documents. As such, the administrative assistant
is also acting as a technical influencer, since they have firsthand
knowledge of how a new copier with improved features would impact
business processes. Since the managing partner in a law firm oversees
the day-to-day operations, that person has the authority to direct the
buyer to evaluate new copiers that would meet the specifications
described by the administrative assistant and present an analysis of
copiers. After evaluating the list provided by the buyer, the managing
partner can make the final selection and thus act as the decider.

According to Tony Rutigliano and Brian Brim in their book *Strengths
Based Selling*, "The days of a single economic decision maker are over
in most companies and industries. Even some small businesses make
decisions in groups."

For example, a study in Germany found that 86% of procurement decisions
at large- and medium-sized companies are made by groups of 2 to 20
people. In companies of less than 100 employees, there were typically 3
people involved, whereas in companies of 1,000 or more, there were as
many as 34 people involved. This illustrates the importance of the
marketer (or salesperson) understanding the set of roles in the buying
center, identifying the role(s) each individual plays, and developing an
execution strategy to make the sale.

:::: {#note-00014 .note}
::: title
The Buyer Center
:::

Watch this quick video of the buying center applied to a real-world
example. It's a great way to gain insight into this process.

[09. Buying Center Analysis](#)
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00005}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00006}

:::: {#rf-003 .note}
::: title
:::

3\.

"What Are the Four Types of B2B Markets?," IGW, accessed August 4, 2022,
https://infographicworld.com/b2b-what-are-the-four-types-of-b2b-markets/.
::::

:::: {#rf-004 .note}
::: title
:::

4\.

Amy Lamare, "Meet the billionaire who supplies the burgers for
McDonald's and Burger King," Celebrity Net Worth, published November 7,
2020,
https://www.celebritynetworth.com/articles/billionaire-news/meet-the-billionaire-who-supplies-the-burgers-for-mcdonalds-and-burger-king/.
::::

:::: {#rf-005 .note}
::: title
:::

5\.

"How to Buy and Source from Alibaba," Alibaba.com Seller Central,
published December 15, 2020,
https://seller.alibaba.com/businessblogs/px65f6s8-how-to-buy-and-source-from-alibaba.
::::

:::: {#rf-006 .note}
::: title
:::

6\.

"How to Buy and Source from Alibaba," Alibaba.com Seller Central,
published December 15, 2020,
https://seller.alibaba.com/businessblogs/px65f6s8-how-to-buy-and-source-from-alibaba.
::::

:::: {#rf-007 .note}
::: title
:::

7\.

"Selling Greener Products and Services to the Federal Government,"
United States Environmental Protection Agency, last updated April 28,
2022,
https://www.epa.gov/greenerproducts/selling-greener-products-and-services-federal-government.
::::

:::: {#rf-008 .note}
::: title
:::

8\.

"4.2 Types of B2B Buyers," University of Minnesota Libraries Publishing,
accessed August 4, 2022,
https://open.lib.umn.edu/principlesmarketing/chapter/4-2-types-of-b2b-buyers/.
::::

:::: {#rf-009 .note}
::: title
:::

9\.

"Buy Classes," Common Language Marketing Dictionary, accessed August 4,
2022, https://marketing-dictionary.org/b/buy-classes/.
::::

:::: {#rf-010 .note}
::: title
:::

10\.

"Systems Buying," Monash Business School, last updated February 2018,
https://www.monash.edu/business/marketing/marketing-dictionary/s/systems-buying.
::::

:::: {#rf-011 .note}
::: title
:::

11\.

"7 Different Members of the Buying Centre of an Organisation," Your
Article Library, accessed September 29, 2021,
https://www.yourarticlelibrary.com/organization/7-different-members-of-the-buying-centre-of-an-organisation/22538.
::::

:::: {#rf-012 .note}
::: title
:::

12\.

Marco Nink and John H. Fleming, "B2B Companies: Do You Know Who Your
Customer Is?," Gallup.com, published November 11, 2014,
https://news.gallup.com/businessjournal/179309/b2b-companies-know-customer.aspx.
::::

:::: {#rf-013 .note}
::: title
:::

13\.

Marco Nink and John H. Fleming, "B2B Companies: Do You Know Who Your
Customer Is?," Gallup.com, published November 11, 2014,
https://news.gallup.com/businessjournal/179309/b2b-companies-know-customer.aspx.
::::

# 

authority

the right to give orders, supervise the work of others, and make certain
decisions

brokers

individuals or businesses that bring buyers and sellers together,
usually for a commission

buy classes

buying situations that are distinguished on four characteristics:
newness to decision makers, number of alternatives to be considered,
uncertainty inherent in the buying situation, and the amount of
information needed for making a buying decision

buyers

the people in the buying center who handle the paperwork of the actual
purchase

buying center

groups of people within organizations who make purchasing decisions

deciders

the people in the buying center who ultimately determine any part of the
entire buying decision

gatekeepers

individuals in the buying center who control information and/or access
to decision makers and influencers

government markets

purchases made by the governing bodies of nations, states, or
communities

influence

the capacity to have an effect on the character, development, or
behavior of someone or something

influencers

individuals whose views influence other members of the buying center in
making the final decision

initiator

the person in the buying center who first suggests or thinks of the idea
of buying the product or service

institutions

organizations, establishments, foundations, societies, or the like
devoted to the promotion of a particular cause or program, especially
one of a public, educational, or charitable character

modified rebuy

a buying situation in which an individual or organization buys goods
that have been purchased previously but changes either the supplier or
some element of the previous order

new-task buy

a complex B2B buying situation in which the organization buys a product
or service for the first time

producers

those individuals or businesses who buy raw goods to use in the creation
of goods or services

resellers

companies or individuals (merchants) that purchase goods or services
with the intention of selling, leasing, or renting rather than consuming
or using them

retailers

businesses that sell goods to consumers in relatively small quantities
for personal consumption

straight rebuys

purchases in which the business customer buys the same goods from the
same supplier in the same quantity at the same terms and requires
minimal decision making

systems selling

selling a complete solution to a problem or need rather than one or more
of the component parts

users

the people who consume or use the product or service

wholesalers

businesses that typically purchase larger quantities from producers and
then resell them to retailers
