m00023

84522200-8c9a-4a97-8ec9-57a2de4a45cf

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

List and describe the external influences on B2B buyer behavior.

Explain the internal factors that influence B2B buyer behavior.

Examine the individual factors that impact B2B buyer behavior.

List and describe the interpersonal factors that influence B2B buyer
behavior.

Explain the conditional factors that impact B2B buyer behavior.

Think about it: B2B buyers are people just like you. They don't make
buying decisions in a vacuum; rather, they are influenced by a number of
different factors throughout the B2B buying process, just as consumers
are influenced in making purchases for their own consumption. These
factors can be grouped into five major categories: external factors,
internal factors, individual factors, interpersonal factors, and
conditional factors (as shown in [\#](#)). Let's take a closer look.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# External Factors {#sect-00002}

External factors at work in the B2B buying decision can be economic
conditions, the political/legal environment, competition, and the social
environment.

First consider economic factors, such as the level of primary demand,
the economic outlook, and the cost of money (i.e., interest rates). When
the economy is strong, when unemployment is low, and when personal
income is up, B2C demand increases, driving upward demand in the B2B
market. Conversely, during economic recession, B2B buyers look for ways
to cut costs, and buying is significantly reduced.

Political and legal factors also influence B2B buying decisions. These
factors include the political system, the political situation, and
government policies. Legal factors include laws, rules, and regulations,
including tariffs (which are taxes on imported goods) and exchange rates
(the value of one country's currency versus another.) To give you an
idea of how such legal factors can negatively impact a firm, consider
that, in 2018, after an expert panel found possibilities of health
risks, the Indian government banned approximately 6,000 brands of
medicine, dealing a blow to both domestic and foreign pharmaceutical
firms. It doesn't take much imagination to recognize the impact this
policy had on these pharmaceutical firms.

Competition also affects B2B buying behavior. It stands to reason that,
when a competitor changes its product offering and garners more market
share, a business will want to respond by going on the defensive and
changing its product offering as well, triggering one or more B2B buying
situations. The fast-food industry is just one example of this. Wendy's
was the first national fast-food chain to introduce salads in response
to consumers' desires for healthier food options. Shortly thereafter,
many other competitors, including Arby's, McDonald's, Chick-fil-A, and
Burger King, followed suit.

Finally, the social environment influences B2B buying behavior because
each member of the class will likely approach the situation armed with
different information, different perspectives, and perhaps different
personal agendas. For example, the vice president of the marketing
department may want to spend money on a new customer relationship
management software package, whereas the vice president of the finance
department may be more inclined to reserve capital and forego the
purchase.

# Internal Factors {#sect-00003}

Organizational factors are those factors internal to the organization
that affect buying decisions. Every organization has certain business
objectives and goals, and goods and services should be purchased
according to these objectives. For example, if a company experiences a
period of poor sales performance, management might slow down or halt
major purchasing decisions until the financial performance of the
company improves. Conversely, a company with a strong track record of
sales may push for more strategic purchases to gain or maintain a
competitive edge.

Consider how an organization's technology influences B2B buying
behavior, particularly if the purchases must be compatible with the
technology that is already in place in the organization. When purchasing
a new product or service, decision makers are often reluctant to change
the existing technology and go with something new.

Finally, workforce skills are as important as the decision makers and
the products or services themselves since the workers are the ones who
are going to use the new equipment or service and (hopefully) will make
the most of it. Thus, new purchases must be compatible with the existing
workforce skills, or employees must be offered training on the new
technology.

# Individual Factors {#sect-00004}

Just as with consumers, B2B buying decisions are influenced by the
characteristics of the individuals in the buying center. Consider just
one factor: age. FINN Partners compiled its B2B Buyer's Influence Report
and discovered several interesting statistics. Millennials (i.e., those
born between 1981 and 1995) are generally the most optimistic about
purchase decisions. A whopping 83% are confident that they are paying a
reasonable price, and 97% believed that the vendor would deliver as
promised. This compares to only single digits for baby boomers (those
born between 1946 and 1964).

The B2B buyer's education also plays a role. A more educated buyer is
assumed to select goods and services carefully and approach the buying
decision rationally, whereas a buyer with less education may make the
buying decision based on a hunch.

Job position typically conveys an individual's status within the
organization. Those individuals involved in the buying decision who are
higher up in the organization's hierarchy may have more influence than
those with less formal authority within the organization.

Those involved in B2B buying decisions are, after all, human beings, so
it stands to reason that personality will play a role. Personality
refers to an individual's distinctive patterns of thinking, feeling, and
behavior, and these factors will play a role in making buying decisions.
Examples of the many personality traits that B2B buyers and consumers
have include things like self-confidence, aggression, and
competitiveness. For example, some risk-averse individuals may prefer to
do business with a known supplier rather than a vendor they are not
familiar with. Likewise, personal preferences play a role in the B2B
buying situation. Some individuals in the buying center may favor
products of a certain quality, brand, price point, and so on.

# Interpersonal Factors {#sect-00005}

Business buying decisions are typically collective and follow procedures
established by the organization. The buying center usually consists of
several individuals with different formal or informal authority, status
within the organization, and technical expertise.

If the buying situation involves a highly complex product or service, an
individual with significant expertise will have and exert more influence
in the buying decision. It's also important to note that some
individuals in the buying center may have more influence than others,
whether due to their position within the organization or their personal
persuasiveness.

Finally, organizational politics and culture may also impact who the
decision makers are and the degree of power or influence they exert on
the decision process. Companies with a strong hierarchical structure may
foster a tendency for decisions to be made at a higher level within the
organization. This may be particularly true in international B2B
transactions, which will be covered in more depth in [Marketing in a
Global Environment](#).

# Conditional Factors {#sect-00006}

It stands to reason that the present financial condition of the
organization will play a large role in the buying decision. If the
organization is financially struggling and cash is in short supply, it
may decide to make a purchase from suppliers who offer credit or may
choose to purchase a less expensive product that is within its budget.

Likewise, availability of the product or service will play a significant
role in the buying decision. An organization may choose to go with a
supplier who can readily deliver the product or service within the time
constraints of the project, even if the price is higher.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00007}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00008}

:::: {#rf-014 .note}
::: title
:::

14\.

"Government bans hundreds of painkillers, creams, antibioticsm" Mint,
accessed August 23, 2022,
https://www.livemint.com/Companies/zDrBQAKhSFluZtmyTHGJRO/Several-painkillers-creams-antibiotics-banned-by-governmen.html
::::

:::: {#rf-015 .note}
::: title
:::

15\.

Shirley Leung, "Wendy's Sees Green in Salad, So Rivals Begin to Follow
Suit," The Wall Street Journal, published April 24, 2003,
https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB105113127748655200.
::::

:::: {#rf-016 .note}
::: title
:::

16\.

"There's Intel to Be Gained Looking at B2B Buyers' by Generation,"
published January 28, 2020,
https://www.finnpartners.com/news-insights/there-eys-intel-to-be-gained-looking-at-b2b-buyers-ey-by-generation/.
::::

# 

business objectives and goals

achievable outcomes that provide a framework for achieving success

competition

the rivalry between companies selling similar products and services with
the goal of achieving revenue, profit and market share growth

economic factors

factors that affect the economy, such as interest rates, tax rates,
laws, policies, wages, and government actions

expertise

expert skill or knowledge in a particular field

personality

the combination of characteristics or qualities that form an
individual's distinctive character

political and legal factors

factors such as the political system, the political situation, and
government policies that influence B2B buying decisions

social environment

the values, attitudes, beliefs, wants, and desires of the consuming
public

technology

applications of science, data, engineering, and information for business
purposes

workforce skills

also called employability skills, the basic skills a person must have to
succeed in any workplace
