m00024

b221628a-8a02-4cc3-8c3d-bb76d3d919bc

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Explain and describe the stages in the B2B buying process.

# The B2B Buying Process {#sect-00002}

The B2B buying process---the journey B2B buyers and the buying center
take to complete a purchase---is significantly different and more
complex than the consumer purchasing decision process. You'll recall
from [Consumer Markets and Purchasing Behavior](#). That the consumer
buying decision encompasses five stages---need recognition or problem
awareness, information search, evaluation of alternatives, purchase
decision, and post-purchase evaluation. By contrast, the B2B process
involves eight stages (shown in [\#](#)). Let's take a closer look at
each of these stages.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

## Stage 1: Problem Recognition {#sect-00003}

Similar to the consumer purchasing decision process, the first stage in
the B2B buying decision process begins when someone within the
organization identifies a problem or a need that can be resolved through
a purchase. For straight rebuy purchases, this stage may be as simple as
the fact that the organization is running low on copier paper or toner.
In a case like this, the B2B buyer simply places the order, and the
process ends.

Modified rebuy purchases make the process more complex, as these may
involve replacing outdated equipment, technological changes, or revising
marketing brochures or advertisements. Now, instead of placing an order
from an existing supplier for an already-purchased product, the B2B
buyer has to follow through on more of the stages in the process.

New-task buying is the most complex. For example, your organization may
decide that, due to the growth of the organization, it needs to purchase
an accounting software system or a new piece of manufacturing equipment.
In these cases, the B2B buying process will likely incorporate all of
the steps listed in [\#](#).

## Stage 2: Need Description {#sect-00004}

Next, the buying center will need to further define what needs to be
purchased. This often involves collaboration among members of the buying
center in terms of describing what is needed from a technical
perspective, desired features, quantity, etc.

Consider a firm that is developing a new electronic control for an
appliance. The components are many---a printed circuit board,
capacitors, resistors, microprocessors, etc. Members of the buying
center will be called upon to develop a bill of materials---a list of
parts, items, assemblies, subassemblies, documents, drawings, and other
materials required to create the control. Think of the bill of materials
as the "recipe" used to create the finished product.

## Stage 3: Product Specification {#sect-00005}

B2B buyers often develop product specifications, a blueprint that
outlines the product to be built, how it will look, what features it
will have, and how it will function. The product specification needs to
be concise and readable for everyone in the buying center and yet
contain sufficient technical data to provide the product team with the
information it needs to develop the new product or feature.

## Stage 4: Supplier Search {#sect-00006}

Now that you've established the technical specifications for the
product, it's time to identify potential suppliers. This is where the
experience of those in the buying center comes into play, as they
attempt to determine which suppliers have the best quality, delivery,
and price. Just like consumers in the "information search" stage of the
consumer buying process, those in the buying center may look online to
find suppliers, but there are many other resources available to B2B
buyers, such as trade magazines, industry expert blogs, and webinars
conducted by suppliers.

## Stage 5: Proposal Solicitation {#sect-00007}

Once the list of potential vendors has been developed and whittled down,
qualified vendors will be asked to submit proposals. If it's a
relatively straightforward purchase, this proposal may be as easy as a
vendor sending the buyer a catalog or providing the buyer with a link to
the company's website. However, more complex purchases typically require
the vendor to submit a detailed proposal outlining what the vendor can
do to address the company's needs. This proposal will likely contain
product specifications, timing, and---of course---pricing.

## Stage 6: Supplier Selection {#sect-00008}

After reviewing the proposals from the various vendors, the buying
center makes a choice. This stage in the B2B buying process involves a
thorough review of the proposals submitted, with a critical eye tuned to
factors such as supplier capabilities, reputation, warranties, price,
etc. If the purchase requires a substantial financial outlay and/or is
extremely complex, or if many proposals were solicited, the buying
center may narrow down the list of vendors to just a few and invite them
to meet (either in person or virtually) to further discuss the proposal
and address any questions or concerns.

## Stage 7: Order-Routine Specification {#sect-00009}

After selecting suppliers, the B2B buyer negotiates the details of the
order. The critical items here are what is needed (i.e., the technical
specifications), how much is needed (i.e., the quantity required), and
when it is needed (i.e., the expected time of delivery). This stage will
likely also include negotiation of things such as return policies,
warranties, and other critical items involved with the purchase.

## Stage 8: Performance Review {#sect-00010}

Just as consumers evaluate purchases after they have made them, and
similar to the way that your employer may conduct a performance review
to assess your job performance, the B2B buyer periodically reviews the
performance of the selected supplier to assess if the product and the
supplier meet expectations. For example, the B2B buyer may solicit
product feedback from users and/or rate the supplier on different
criteria such as quality, promptness of delivery, etc. As a result of
the performance review, the B2B buyer may decide to continue, modify, or
even end a supplier relationship.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00011}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# 

bill of materials

a comprehensive inventory of the raw materials, assemblies,
subassemblies, parts, and components

B2B buying process

encompasses 8 stages: problem recognition, need description, product
specification, supplier search, proposal selection, supplier selection,
order-routine specification, performance review

product specifications

a document carrying essential information to keep teams on track when
designing and developing a product
