m00025

58fb7763-9ff7-4f33-8f17-d045a0939cbc

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Discuss ethical issues pertaining to B2B marketing.

Explain the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act.

Provide an example of a company that displays ethics in B2B marketing.

# Business Culture and Industry Practices {#sect-00002}

As we've seen above, there are several differences between B2C and B2B
marketing. Consider purchasing, for example. Unlike B2C transactions, it
is far more common in B2B transactions for vendors to offer "perks" such
as free dinners, golf outings, and trips. In some foreign countries, B2B
and government buyers not only expect these types of "perks" but also
may demand bribes if you want to do business with them on their turf.
This presents unique ethical challenges for B2B sellers and buyers. As a
B2B seller, of course you want to make the sale, particularly if it's a
large sale. On the other hand, you know that a reputation for ethical
behavior, including honesty, transparency, and open communication, is
critical to the success of your business and may even be the decisive
factor in a B2B buyer's decision to buy from you instead of a
competitor.

## Bribes and "Grease Payments" {#sect-00003}

Transparency International, a watchdog group, annually ranks the
likelihood of companies from the world's industrialized countries to
bribe abroad. The index ranks 180 countries and territories by their
perceived levels of public sector corruption on a sale of 1 to 100, in
which 100 is perceived to be very clean and 0 is perceived to be highly
corrupt.

Which countries ranked in the bottom five for 2021? Let's take a look:

South Sudan

Syria

Somalia

Venezuela

Yemen

:::: {#note-00006 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

If you're curious, the United States ranked 25th in the world. And the
least corrupt countries in 2021? That would be Denmark, Finland, and New
Zealand, which tied for first place.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
Fighting Corruption
:::

For more information about Transparency International, including
corruption wins, scandals, and predictions, check out this [corruption
perceptions index](#). You may also enjoy this TEDx Talks video about
the power of corruption.

[Power of corruption \| Lucy Koechlin \| TEDxHSG](#)
::::

Let's consider how you would handle a scenario involving bribes. You're
the plant manager in Taiwan for a US-based electronics company. You are
expecting a critical shipment of diodes that are being imported into
Taiwan from South Vietnam. Without the diodes, you will miss an
important production deadline for a new---and potentially
lucrative---customer. The shipment arrives in the Port of Taipei on a
timely basis, but customs refuse to release the shipment, claiming that
it needs to do further inspection, and it may be several days or even a
couple of weeks before the shipment is released. However, an agent of
customs advises you that in exchange for a "facilitation fee" of several
hundred dollars, the process can be expedited. How do you handle this?
Do you pay the "facilitation fee" (essentially a bribe, which is illegal
according to the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, covered below) and meet
your customer's deadline, or do you refuse to pay the fee and miss your
customer's deadline? How will missing that deadline impact your firm's
relationship with the new customer?

Let's consider how you would handle still another similar scenario.
You're the regional distribution manager for a US company, and you've
been assigned to head up a new distribution facility in a South American
country. At least two other competitors (both foreign corporations) are
also trying to enter the same market, so you've been instructed to
establish this facility as quickly as possible in order to beat the
competition. However, government officials have advised you that it may
take up to 10 months to obtain a building permit but that the time frame
could be considerably shortened in exchange for the payment of an
"expediting fee." These fees (essentially a bribe) are both illegal
according to US law. However, your competitors are foreign firms not
subject to US law, and paying such fees is neither illegal nor
considered unethical. How will you handle this situation? Will you pay
the fees in order to be first in the market, or will you let your
competitors beat you to the market?

These are a couple of dilemmas faced by marketers in B2B situations.

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
Corruption Scandals
:::

Check out [Transparency International's list of top corruption
scandals](#). Interesting read!
::::

## Price Fixing {#sect-00004}

Price fixing---an agreement among competitors (either written, verbal,
or inferred from the parties' conduct) that affects prices or
competitive terms---is prohibited by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC).
Keep in mind that, despite the term, price fixing isn't confined to an
agreement to set the same price. Companies can also be involved in price
fixing if they offer or withhold the same discounts or shipping terms or
set a production amount or quota.

Price fixing is illegal because it's considered anticompetitive and
hurts both consumers and businesses. Let's illustrate with a real-life
example with a company you're likely familiar with---StarKist. In 2019,
a San Francisco federal judge ordered the company to pay a fine in the
amount of \$100 million in connection with a canned tuna price-fixing
conspiracy that involved StarKist, Bumble Bee Foods, and Chicken of the
Sea, who regularly exchanged information about their sales and plans for
pricing. The lawsuit alleged that, under the scheme, consumers were
forced to pay more for canned tuna than they would have otherwise.

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
Tuna Price-Fixing Lawsuit
:::

Learn more about the details of the price-fixing lawsuit from this short
video on the Ring of Fire channel.

[Starkist, Bumble Bee And Others In Trouble As Canned Tuna Price Fixing
Lawsuit Moves Forward](#)
::::

# The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act {#sect-00005}

The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) was enacted in 1977. Its
purpose is to prohibit the payment of bribes (sometimes called
"facilitation fees") to foreign officials in order to obtain or retain
business. The FCPA applies to prohibited conduct anywhere in the world
and extends to publicly traded companies and their officers, directors,
employees, stockholders, and agents.

The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Department of
Justice work cooperatively to enforce the FCPA. Sanctions for violations
can be significant, including both civil and criminal penalties. The SEC
can bring civil enforcement actions against companies (along with their
officers, directors, employees, stockholders, and agents) for violations
or for bribery, and if found guilty under the act, the company may have
to pay back its "ill-gotten gains" as well as paying prejudgment
interest and civil penalties. For example, one of its most recent cases
involved KT Corporation, a South Korean telecommunications company, in
which the SEC alleged that the company had violated the books and
records and internal accounting controls provisions of the FCPA by
making improper payments to government officials in Korea and Vietnam.

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
Kforce
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Kforce is a B2B professional staffing and solutions firm that
specializes in technology, finance, and accounting. Headquartered in
Tampa, Florida, the company has over 50 offices nationwide and two
national recruiting centers.

The location of its corporate headquarters played a big role when
Hurricane Irma struck South Florida and the Bahamas in 2017, because the
hurricane's impact was felt on a personal level by the company. The
hurricane, which struck Florida as a Category 4 storm, ripped off roofs,
flooded coastal cities, and knocked out power for more than 6.8 million
people.

Instead of idly standing by or focusing solely on getting its business
back up and running, Kforce decided to "make lemonade out of lemons" and
have a positive impact on the community (see [\#](#)). The company
raised \$1 million for the American Red Cross and sponsored private jet
missions that flew essential supplies to the Bahamas. It also encouraged
users to make donations for hurricane relief, generating several
thousand additional dollars for the cause.

But Kforce's philanthropy after Hurricane Irma wasn't a one-time deal.
In 2021, the company expanded its "Day of Giving" campaign to a "Season
of Impact" and encouraged employees to give their time and talents to
nonprofit organizations of their choice. It also held a number of events
such as a food drive and the Tampa Bay Heart Walk to benefit the
American Heart Association.

KForce does a lot for the community. [Check out its website](#) to learn
more about its corporate social responsibility programs.
::::

#  {#sect-00006}

In this chapter, we defined business-to-business (B2B) markets and
buying behavior and explored the differences between
business-to-consumer (B2C) and B2B markets. We discussed the types of
buyers in B2B transactions---producers, resellers, governments, and
institutions---and identified the different types of buy classes in the
B2B market, as well as the roles of those in the buying center---the
people within the organization who have varying influence on the
purchase decision.

We examined the five major categories of influencing factors on B2B
decisions: external factors, internal factors, organizational factors,
interpersonal factors, and conditional factors. We also reviewed the
eight stages of the B2B buying process: problem recognition, need
description, product specification, supplier search, proposal
solicitation, supplier selection, order-routine specification, and
performance review. Finally, we explored some ethical issues with
respect to the B2B buying process, including Transparency
International's Corruption Perceptions Index and the Foreign Corrupt
Practices Act (FCPA).

#  {#sect-00007}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00008}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00009}

Your personal brand is the skills and talents you bring to future
employers or to your own business. Think about how businesses market to
other businesses. How can you adopt some of those same marketing
techniques and develop a plan to market yourself for an internship or
employment?

Visit LinkedIn, and look at the profiles of a handful of marketing
managers. Examine how each marketing manager depicts their brand within
their profile. What do they say about themselves that's unique?

Now write a one-page summary of your brand.

#  {#sect-00010}

Utilize LinkedIn to find brand managers in your geographic area, and
invite one or more to connect with you. It's best to go beyond the
suggested LinkedIn request message and be more inviting and clearer on
why you are reaching out to them. Once linked, "interview" the
professional by asking questions. A few questions to begin with might
be: Was there a particular class in college that resonated with you and
your career goals? How did you find your first internship? Do you have
suggestions that can help me improve my LinkedIn profile? Additional
questions may explore their education, their experience, their career
goals, and how they spend their days and weeks.

#  {#sect-00011}

## Corporate Medical Services {#sect-00012}

Corporate Medical Services (CMS) was established in Tennessee on October
1, 1995, with one person, one computer, and one client. The company was
started with the goal of providing Department of Transportation (DOT)
customers with a resource to meet new drug testing requirements.

"The Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA), along with the
Department of Transportation (DOT), requires that persons subject to the
commercial driver's license (CDL) requirements and their employers
follow alcohol and drug testing rules." These rules include procedures
for testing, frequency of tests, and substances tested for. An employer
who employs only themselves as a driver shall implement a random alcohol
and controlled substances testing program of two or more covered
employees in the random testing selection pool.

With a combination of technology and great customer service, the company
grew steadily.

1995: CMS founded

1996: First office location established

1998: Nationwide 24/7 services offered

2001: Automated faxing of results

2001: New office location established due to growth of company

2004: Automated emailing of results

2008: Created in-house DotStop

DotStop is the brand name of a drug and alcohol testing consortium for
trucking companies with 20 or fewer drivers.

consortium program

2009: Online results reporting made available

2010: Online scheduling of services made available

2012: Began providing management services for existing consortiums

2013: Introduced CMS's Sleep Express

2016: Began developing programs to automate DMV updates

:::: {#note-00018 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Today, CMS provides services to a wide variety of clients and industries
across the United States and Canada. Clients include trucking, busing,
firework manufacturers, schools, construction, hospital organizations,
other third-party administrators, consortiums, and associations. In
2020, CMS reported over 100,000 drug screens and additional services for
more than 2,500 companies.

With stricter requirements coming to the industry, there is a tremendous
need for drug and alcohol testing. Data reveals that there are 3.5
million truck drivers in the United States. For just the trucking
industry alone, the need for consortium services as well as
company-sponsored drug and alcohol testing is increasing every year.

CMS prides itself as the concierge service provider in the industry.
[\#](#) is a competitive analysis grid, and it outlines how CMS compares
to its competitors based on the number of services they offer and the
level of customer service provided. For example, DISA Global Solutions
(DISA), Workforce QA, and FSS Solutions (FSS) are companies that provide
a higher number of services than CMS but much lower customer service.
CMS offers fewer services but the highest level of customer service.
Notice that as companies offer more services, their level of customer
service decreases.

Marketers use competitive analysis grids to understand how they compare
to their competitors on the various metrics that are important in their
industry. It is important for a company to grasp both its points of
parity and points of differentiation compared to competitors.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

In choosing to differentiate their company based on service, CMS was
promising customers an unrivaled experience when they needed drug or
alcohol testing. Many times, the need for testing was the result of an
emergency situation. Companies that relied on CMS for this service felt
a level of comfort knowing they would be taken care of quickly and
efficiently when they were in the most need.

Among the promises, CMS vowed the following:

*1. Unrivaled Experience*

"CMS has been helping companies manage the complexities of regulations
and requirements for over 25 years. During that time, we have helped
over 15,000 companies significantly reduce the hassle of managing their
drug testing programs."

*2. Concierge Level Personal Service*

"Concierge level service is not a term frequently used in our industry,
but we believe in it and actively demonstrate it to our clients daily.
When you are miles from home and need support, it's what you want. It is
always a good day at CMS, and we hope to make your day better by helping
you in any way we can."

*3. More Security, Less Hassle*

"Dealing with governmental regulations and requirements is no easy task.
We have developed processes, procedures, and performance benchmarks to
deal with the complexity of this industry so that you don't have to. At
the end of the day, you will be confident that your program is operating
the way it should."

*4. Respect*

"We are here to serve our clients. To successfully accomplish that goal,
we treat our staff, our clients, our vendors, and your donors with
respect. In an industry where conversations can sometimes get tense, we
handle every situation in a respectful and professional manner in order
to mitigate any issues that may arise."

*5. Speed of Technology*

"Our systems and processes are designed to get you the results you need
as quickly as possible, which is why no one is faster at reporting drug
screens. Our system averages a 7-minute turnaround on negative reports,
once released from the lab."

As CMS looked for growth, it began to work with industry trade
associations. The trucking industry was growing rapidly. Industry
leaders were continuing to expand their fleets, and new trucking
companies were entering the market. Providing drug and alcohol testing
was not something the companies wanted to think about---until it was a
necessity. Corporate safety managers could be difficult to reach;
however, with a narrow focus and significant industry knowledge, CMS was
well positioned to network and provide critical information regarding
the ever-changing government regulations.

CMS knew it needed to begin developing brand awareness and continue
fostering relationships in the industry. When it was time to make the
buying decision, CMS wanted to be in the top-of-mind consideration set.
The company knew the buying cycle may be long for a corporate decision
to change which provider they were using for testing. It was a process
it was willing to wait for, and it was in it for the long haul.

## Case Questions {#sect-00013}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00014}

:::: {#rf-017 .note}
::: title
:::

17\.

"Corruption Perceptions Index," Transparency International," accessed
May 11, 2022, https://www.transparency.org/en/cpi/2021.
::::

:::: {#rf-018 .note}
::: title
:::

18\.

"Corruption Perceptions Index," Transparency International," accessed
May 11, 2022, https://www.transparency.org/en/cpi/2021.
::::

:::: {#rf-019 .note}
::: title
:::

19\.

"Corruption Perceptions Index," Transparency International," accessed
May 11, 2022, https://www.transparency.org/en/cpi/2021.
::::

:::: {#rf-020 .note}
::: title
:::

20\.

"Price Fixing," Federal Trade Commission, published December 15, 2017,
https://www.ftc.gov/tips-advice/competition-guidance/guide-antitrust-laws/dealings-competitors/price-fixing.
::::

:::: {#rf-021 .note}
::: title
:::

21\.

"StarKist Price Fixing: StarKist to Pay \$100M Fine in Tuna Price-Fixing
Case," CBS News, updated September 11, 2019,
https://www.cbsnews.com/news/starkist-price-fixing-starkist-to-pay-100m-fine-in-tuna-price-fixing-case/.
::::

:::: {#rf-022 .note}
::: title
:::

22\.

"Spotlight on Foreign Corrupt Practices Act," SEC Emblem, modified
February 2, 2017,
https://www.sec.gov/spotlight/foreign-corrupt-practices-act.shtml.
::::

:::: {#rf-023 .note}
::: title
:::

23\.

"SEC Enforcement Actions: FCPA Cases," SEC Emblem, modified June 6,
2022, https://www.sec.gov/enforce/sec-enforcement-actions-fcpa-cases.
::::

:::: {#rf-024 .note}
::: title
:::

24\.

"About Kforce," Kforce, accessed May 12, 2022,
https://www.kforce.com/about-test/.
::::

:::: {#rf-025 .note}
::: title
:::

25\.

Chris Huber, "2017 Hurricane Irma: Facts, FAQs, and How to Help," World
Vision, updated August 1, 2018,
https://www.worldvision.org/disaster-relief-news-stories/2017-hurricane-irma-facts.
::::

:::: {#rf-026 .note}
::: title
:::

26\.

Brian Anderson, "3 Inspirational Examples of How B2B Brands Spread Cheer
on #GivingTuesday," B2B Marketing Exchange, December 3, 2019,
https://b2bmarketing.exchange/blog/3-inspirational-examples-of-how-b2b-brands-spread-cheer-on-givingtuesday/.
::::

:::: {#rf-027 .note}
::: title
:::

27\.

"Kforce Launches Season of Impact to Further Connect with Communities,"
Kforce, accessed January 27, 2022,
https://www.kforce.com/press-releases/season-of-impact-2021/.
::::

:::: {#rf-028 .note}
::: title
:::

28\.

"CMS History," Corporate Medical Services, accessed May 12, 2022,
https://corporatemedicalservices.com/our-company/cms-history/.
::::

:::: {#rf-029 .note}
::: title
:::

29\.

"CMS Executive Staff," Corporate Medical Services, accessed May 12,
2022,
https://corporatemedicalservices.com/our-company/cms-executive-staff/.
::::

:::: {#rf-030 .note}
::: title
:::

30\.

"Drug & Alcohol Testing Program," FMCSA, accessed May 12, 2022,
https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/regulations/drug-alcohol-testing-program.
::::

:::: {#rf-031 .note}
::: title
:::

31\.

"CMS History," Corporate Medical Services, accessed May 12, 2022,
https://corporatemedicalservices.com/our-company/cms-history/.
::::

:::: {#rf-032 .note}
::: title
:::

32\.

Stasha Smiljanic, "How Many Trucking Companies Are There in the United
States," PolicyAdvice, accessed May 12, 2022,
https://policyadvice.net/insurance/insights/how-many-trucking-companies-in-the-us.
::::

# 

Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA)

a US statute that prohibits firms and individuals from paying bribes to
foreign officials
