m00071

e2db67bb-3560-451d-8661-2805264097ae

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define services.

List the classification of services.

Describe the characteristics of services.

# Services Defined {#sect-00002}

You may have heard that the United States' economy is primarily
considered a service economy. But do you know why this is? [\#](#)
provides the answer. It outlines the percentage each industry
contributed to the gross domestic product (GDP) in 2020. (A quick
refresher from your economics course: the GDP is a measure of the total
monetary value of all finished goods and services generated within a
country's borders during a specified period of time.) Which industries
are the largest contributor to the GDP? Service industries. (Note that
this figure does not include smaller industries such as utilities, or
mining and agriculture.) When you total the service industries, they
make up a whopping 67 percent of GDP versus only 10.8 percent for
manufacturing.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

In a nutshell, services are the nonphysical, intangible economic
activities. On the other hand, physical goods are the things we can
touch or handle, commonly called tangibles. Do you realize that, as you
read this textbook, you're participating in the services sector of the
economy? That's because education is considered part of the service
sector. The service sector also includes things like banking, medical
treatment, transportation, insurance, and many more categories. Based on
the fact that the majority of contributions to the GDP in the United
States are services, and more than half of the country's workforce is
employed in producing "intangibles," it's critical to understand this
important sector from a marketing perspective.

Consider the challenges to marketers when selling services as opposed to
products. A consumer can't touch or see the service before they
purchase, so it's difficult to examine or evaluate benefits. Think about
it: you can't take a service out for a test drive the way you might if
you were buying a new car. Yet it's just as crucial for organizations
that provide services to build brand awareness and brand loyalty.

# Classification of Services {#sect-00003}

Services are classified as people-based services or equipment-based
services. And within those classifications, there are subcategories (see
[\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

## People-Based Services {#sect-00004}

People-based services are when people primarily deliver the service,
rather than equipment or machinery (see [\#](#) for examples). It's the
individuals delivering the service, and the knowledge and skills that
they possess, that add value and allow the service to be performed.
People-based services can be broken down further into these
subcategories:

services provided by unskilled labor: parking lot attendants,
babysitters, and janitors

services provided by skilled labor: plumbers, caterers, and hairstylists

services provided by professionals: doctors, attorneys, college
professors, and accountants

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

## Equipment-Based Services {#sect-00005}

Equipment-based service firms utilize equipment, machinery, and other
forms of technology to perform service tasks (see [\#](#)). Similar to
people-based services, equipment-based services can be further broken
down into subcategories:

automated services: car washes and parking meters

equipment-based services operated by relatively unskilled operators:
dry-cleaning equipment

equipment-based services operated by skilled operators: X-ray machines
and ultrasound equipment

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

There is another way to categorize services, according to well-known
author and professor Christopher Lovelock (1940--2008). He proposed four
broad categories of services:

people processing: services toward people's bodies

possession processing: services toward possessions

mental stimulus processing: services toward people's mind

information processing: services toward intangible assets

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

In [\#](#), the categories are defined on a two-dimensional matrix,
wherein one of the dimensions is the direct recipient of the service and
the other is the nature of the service act.

<figure id="fig-00005">

</figure>

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
Lovelock
:::

If you plan to continue toward a marketing degree, you'll want to
familiarize yourself with Christopher Lovelock's work. You can run a
search on Amazon.com for his books or a search in your browser for
articles and more information. Start by reading his [Wikipedia page](#)
to learn about his academic background and achievements.
::::

Let's look at each of these categories in more depth. The first two
categories (people processing and possession processing) involve
tangible actions directed toward a person's physical body or property,
whereas mental stimulus processing and information processing involve
intangible actions directed toward a person's mind or information. We'll
expand on this in the following sections.

## People Processing {#sect-00006}

In people processing services, the customer is a direct recipient of the
service, and the production and consumption of the service are
simultaneous. Consider examples of services where you must be present in
the service facility in order to interact with the service provider and
receive the service, such as barbershops or hair salons, physical
therapists' offices, or restaurants.

## Possession Processing {#sect-00007}

The difference between people processing and possession processing is
that the service is directed toward the customer's physical possessions.
In other words, production and consumption are separate. Your only
involvement is dropping off the item that requires service or repair and
explaining the problem. For example, once you have taken your car in for
an oil change, you do not need to be physically at the location for the
oil change to occur. Similarly, once you've dropped your clothes off at
the dry cleaner's, you don't need to be physically present when the
cleaning process is performed. These services are tangible because the
direct recipient is one of your possessions rather than you as a person.

## Mental Stimulus Processing {#sect-00008}

In its simplest explanation, mental stimulus processing is when the
services interact with your mind rather than your body. Time and mental
effort are required from the customer to receive this type of service.
What you're doing right now---reading this textbook---is a prime example
of mental stimulus processing. Other examples include psychotherapy or
counseling services. The key here is that services rendered in this
category are intangible.

## Information Processing {#sect-00009}

Information processing is the most intangible form of service, although
it can be transformed into a tangible service output like reports,
books, letters, DVDs, etc. Some examples of information processing
services are things like meeting with your financial advisor regarding
investment advice, legal services, and banking.

:::: {#note-00006 .note}
::: title
Service Industry Stats and a Changing Industry
:::

If you'd like more insight into service industries, check out the [US
Bureau of Labor Statistics website](#). It categorizes industries and
provides interesting statistics on employment.

Companies are launching new services every day. Think about
it---services like Uber didn't exist 20 years ago. As a marketer,
understanding services and their business models is critical. [Start
here and read about on-demand service companies](#) and how
services---and apps---are changing the industry. And also check out this
[article about the top 15 service businesses for 2022](#).
::::

# Characteristics of Services {#sect-00010}

As outlined in [\#](#), service industries contribute the major
percentage of the US GDP. It's important to understand that this shift
from the manufacturing sector to the service sector isn't limited to the
United States. Increasingly, the world economy is being characterized as
a service economy. Looking at economic history, we can see a natural
evolution in developing countries from the agricultural industry to the
service sector as the mainstay of the economy. That's why it's critical
for marketers to understand the characteristics of services.

As we pointed out above, some services come from physical products, such
as getting a haircut or having your income tax return prepared by a
professional. But other services are completely intangible. When you
rent a hotel room, travel on an airplane, visit your doctor, attend a
professional sporting event, or get advice from a lawyer or an
accountant, you're buying a service, so a marketer needs to consider the
characteristics of services in order to get the right marketing messages
to the right target market (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00006">

</figure>

## Service Intangibility {#sect-00011}

By their very nature, services are intangible. This means they can't be
seen, tasted, felt, smelled, or heard before they are purchased.
Consider the last time you purchased automobile insurance for your car.
Other than the physical policy the company sends you (the only tangible
asset), what you've paid for is completely intangible---it's the
company's promise to pay claims against the policy.

Intangible services have a number of implications in marketing. The very
fact that there's nothing to touch, hear, smell, and so on typically
increases the level of uncertainty that a consumer faces when choosing
between services offered by your organization or those of competitors.
Intangible services can seldom be tried out, inspected, or even given a
"test drive" by a customer. Customers have to rely on the word of the
marketers in order to assess what they're actually going to get in
return for what they've paid. In effect, they are buying a promise.

Savvy marketers reduce this uncertainty by creating physical "evidence"
that allows the consumer to picture the service before it is purchased.
For example, a hair salon may have imaging software that predicts how
you would look with different hairstyles or colors. Companies like Zenni
and Eyebuydirect have a virtual mirror that allows you to "try on
eyeglasses" and see how the selected frames look on your face before you
purchase.

## Service Inseparability {#sect-00012}

The order of production and consumption between a physical product and a
service differs. Think about a box of Girl Scout cookies, a physical
good or product. The cookies were produced, stored, sold, and finally
consumed. That's not the way it works with services. Like goods,
services are sold, but they are produced and consumed simultaneously.
They can't be separated from the service providers, whether they are
people or equipment. For example, try to get money out of your bank on a
weekend or evening without an ATM, or try to get a haircut without the
physical presence of your stylist. That's the concept of service
inseparability---you can't separate the delivery of the service from the
presence of the customer. In other words, the service provider is
physically connected to the service and is evaluated on the basis of
their communication skills, language, demeanor, personal hygiene, and
clothing.

The impact to the marketer in these services---in which the service
provider and customer must both be present---is how service providers
(sometimes called frontline employees) conduct themselves in the
presence of the customer because it may determine the likelihood of
repeat business.There are also other marketing implications with this
concept, such as customer cooperation and participation, not to mention
the influence from other customers who may be present.

## Service Variability {#sect-00013}

Have you ever gone to a restaurant and had stellar customer service? You
were seated promptly by a cheerful hostess; the busser filled up your
water glass and refilled it several times during the evening; the
waitstaff was attentive but not to the point of being annoying; and your
dirty dishes were cleared promptly. But perhaps the next time you visit
the same restaurant, your experience isn't quite as amazing. The hostess
isn't as cheerful, and it takes her several minutes to seat you. It
takes a while for someone to refill your water glass. The waitstaff
isn't nearly as attentive as they were during your first visit. What
went wrong?

Perhaps what you've experienced is what's known as service
variability---the quality of the service depends on who provides it,
when it is provided, and how it is provided. For example, Delta Air
Lines prides itself on improving peoples' lives and exceeding customer
expectations. However, because services are provided by humans who have
human experiences where they may not be feeling well or they are having
a bad day, the service may be variable between employees. One Delta
employee may be cheerful and efficient, while another lags due to their
energy and state of mind.

This is a challenge to marketers because products generally have little
variability: each unit is built to certain specifications. For example,
if you buy an Apple iPad Pro and your classmate purchases the same
model, it's likely that the two iPads will be virtually identical. The
case color may be different, but otherwise they are the same. That's not
the case with a service, where there will undoubtedly be variations in
the quality of the service depending on who offers the service, when it
is offered, and at which location. Service-based companies need to rely
on standardizing processes to the extent possible, frequent audits,
customer surveys, and most importantly, customer feedback.

## Service Perishability {#sect-00014}

Unlike most goods, services can't be produced and stored for later use
or sale. Services are, in effect, performances by the service provider.
That's the concept of service perishability. Did you miss tonight's
concert because of traffic? Too bad, because a ticket for tonight's
concert can't be used for tomorrow night's performance. Hotel rooms that
are not occupied, airline seats that are not purchased, and unused gym
memberships cannot be reclaimed. Because these items can't be stored for
later use, they are considered a perishable service. This is
particularly important for marketers because the perishability factor
and the fluctuating demand poses special problems in capacity planning,
scheduling, product planning, and pricing.

One way that marketers deal with this problem is by manipulating demand.
Consider how many restaurants offer "happy hours" with discounted food
and drinks during the late afternoon or early evening. Restaurants do
this because this time is typically the period where there is a lull
before the start of the dinner rush.

:::: {#note-00013 .note}
::: title
Salaries
:::

You might be curious about the salaries of marketing jobs. There are
numerous online resources that provide guides, but the best step to take
is to check out popular sites like Monster, Indeed, and LinkedIn to view
current job positions. They may not all include the salary, but most
will include salary ranges. The following is a list of a few of
resources to get you started.

Monster:

"High-Paying Marketing Jobs"

Acadium:

"How Much Do Marketers Make? Marketing Job Salaries in 2022"

All Business Schools:

"Marketing Manager Salaries and Job Outlook"

Indeed:

"Entry Level Marketing Salary in United States"
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00015}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00016}

:::: {#rf-003 .note}
::: title
:::

3\.

"Percentage Added to U.S. GDP by Industry 2020," Stastista, June 3,
2021,
https://www.statista.com/statistics/248004/percentage-added-to-the-us-gdp-by-industry/.
::::

:::: {#rf-004 .note}
::: title
:::

4\.

Richa Saxena, "SM: Session3: Service Classification, Characteristics and
Triangle,"

The Awakener

(blog), November 26, 2015,
http://richaprof.blogspot.com/2015/11/sm-session3-service-classification.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-005 .note}
::: title
:::

5\.

Rakesh Panchal, "Service Marketing: Four Categories of Services,"

My View: M-bullshit

(blog), April 7, 2014,
http://misbullshit.blogspot.com/2014/04/service-marketing-four-categories-of.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-006 .note}
::: title
:::

6\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-007 .note}
::: title
:::

7\.

Jake, "These 21 Alternatives to Warby Parker Also Let You Try-On
Prescription Eyeglasses at Home in 2022," Modern Fellows, July 28, 2022,
https://www.modernfellows.com/alternatives-to-warby-parker/.
::::

:::: {#rf-008 .note}
::: title
:::

8\.

"4 Characteristics of Service," iEduNote, accessed November 11, 2021,
https://www.iedunote.com/service-characteristics.
::::

:::: {#rf-009 .note}
::: title
:::

9\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-010 .note}
::: title
:::

10\.

Delta Airlines, "Delta Airlines Mission & Vision Analysis," accessed
June 15, 2022, https://mission-statement.com/delta-airlines/.
::::

:::: {#rf-011 .note}
::: title
:::

11\.

"4 Characteristics of Service," iEduNote, accessed November 11, 2021,
https://www.iedunote.com/service-characteristics.
::::

:::: {#rf-012 .note}
::: title
:::

12\.

S. R. Rao, "Implications of Unique Features of Services," Citeman,
December 14, 2007,
https://www.citeman.com/2519-implications-of-unique-features-of-services.html.
::::

# 

equipment-based services

when machinery or equipment plays the primary role in the service
delivery

information processing

intangible actions directed at a customer's assets, such as insurance or
consulting

intangible

unable to be seen, tasted, felt, smelled, or heard

mental stimulus processing

situation in which the services interact with the customer's mind rather
than the body

people-based services

tasks in which people, rather than equipment or machinery, play a major
role in the delivery of the service

people processing

services in which the customer is the direct recipient of the service
and production and consumption are simultaneous

possession processing

services in which the service is directed toward the customer's physical
possessions

services

nonphysical, intangible economic activities

service inseparability

concept where services must be produced and consumed concurrently

service perishability

concept that states services cannot be stored in inventory for future
use or sale

service variability

concept that states the quality of the service depends on who, when,
where, and how it is provided
