m00072

65aa8de1-9be2-435a-bc74-2304af8e19a2

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define and explain the purpose of the service-profit chain model.

Describe the steps in the service-profit chain model.

Explain the Services Marketing Triangle.

# Definition and Purpose of the Service-Profit Chain Model {#sect-00002}

Just like goods-producing businesses, service firms use marketing to
position themselves in selected markets. These businesses position
themselves in the market through marketing mix activities (i.e.,
product, price, place, and promotion). However, because of the inherent
differences between services and tangible products, different marketing
approaches may be required. Consider a product like a laptop or
smartphone. The products are fairly standardized, so they can be
produced and shipped to retailers and then sit on shelves in the store
until purchased by a consumer. However, if you're a service business, it
takes the interaction of the frontline employee and the customer to
literally create the service. The interaction between the employee and
customer is important in creating the value of that service.

The service-profit chain model, created by a group of Harvard
researchers in the 1990s, establishes relationships between
profitability, employee satisfaction, loyalty, and productivity. The
concept is reasonably simple: happy workers make happy customers who
keep coming back and tell their friends. The model itself is a little
more complicated and states the following:

Internal service quality (the support received by frontline employees
from the rest of the organization) leads to employee satisfaction.

Employee satisfaction results in employee loyalty, productivity, and the
willingness to go that "extra mile" for the customer, which creates
value.

Value contributes to customer satisfaction, resulting in customer
loyalty.

Customer loyalty translates to profitability and growth for the
organization.

Perhaps the most critical aspect of this model is that all of these
points link together, are equally important, and depend on one another.
There are no shortcuts to increasing profitability. Didn't quite follow
that? Refer to [\#](#) for a visual depiction.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# Steps in the Service-Profit Chain Model {#sect-00003}

The service-profit chain model connects the interworkings and
relationships between the different parts of a business. It impacts
employee satisfaction and retention, customer satisfaction, customer
loyalty, and profitability. Let's take a closer look.

## Internal Service Quality {#sect-00004}

Internal service quality refers to the perceived satisfaction frontline
employees experience when they are supported by effective policies and
service from the organization. If you've ever worked in a restaurant,
you'll be familiar with the terms "back of house" and "front of house."
Front-of-house employees are "guest-facing" roles like hosts/hostesses
and servers---those who intentionally interact with the customer.
Back-of-house employees like bussers, dishwashers, and cooks typically
don't have direct interaction with the customer. Rather, it's their work
that supports the front-of-house employees. Even if your server may is
friendly, attentive, and efficient, if your silverware is dirty or your
steak isn't prepared as ordered, the overall dining experience is going
to be less than optimal. In addition to the customer dissatisfaction,
server/employee satisfaction will also suffer due to the lack of support
from the back-of-house staff.

Consider another example. Your flight was delayed, and it took forever
to get your luggage and rental car. By the time you get to your hotel,
you're tired and cranky, and you just want to check in and get some
rest. The front desk clerk is cordial and efficient. However, your room
isn't available because the housekeeping staff hasn't cleaned the room
yet. Who gets the brunt of your anger? Imagine the lack of job
satisfaction on the part of the front desk clerk who's tried to do
everything right and was thwarted by the lack of support from
housekeeping.

One of the ways that this problem can be alleviated within an
organization is to create an employee feedback loop in which frontline
employees can communicate problems that hurt productivity, satisfaction,
and loyalty. The feedback loop is a critical element because, as
consultant Sidney Yoshida reports in his study "The Iceberg of
Ignorance," 4 percent of an organization's frontline problems are known
by top management, 9 percent are known by middle management, 74 percent
are known by supervisors, and 100 percent are known by employees.

## Employee Satisfaction {#sect-00005}

Employee satisfaction is the level of happiness or contentment employees
have with their jobs and work environment. It's often the direct result
of company policies and support services that empower employees to
deliver quality products and services. If employees are satisfied with
the company's policies, it's easier to facilitate a happy attitude that
helps consumers have pleasurable experiences with the organization.

For several years, Zappos has made Fortune's list of "100 Best Companies
to Work For." The late CEO Tony Hsieh focused so much on the happiness
of his team and customers that he wrote a series of books about it,
including *Delivering Happiness: A Path to Profits, Passion, and
Purpose*. He recognized that the only person-to-person contact a
customer would have with an online retailer would be with customer
service personnel, so he encouraged his employees to go above and beyond
for the customer.

## Employee Retention and Productivity {#sect-00006}

Employee turnover is one of the most frustrating and recurring problems
that organizations face. Turnover is costly regardless of whether it's
involuntary (such as termination due to poor performance) or voluntary
(such as employee-decided resignation or retirement). The conservative
estimate from the Society of Human Resource Management (SHRM) is that it
costs six to nine months of an employee's annual salary to replace that
person. That's why employee retention---keeping employees motivated so
that they choose to remain with the company---is so critical.

The good news is that employee satisfaction is inversely related to
employee turnover. In other words, an increase in employee satisfaction
brings about a decrease in employee turnover. Perhaps even more
importantly, studies have shown that low turnover leads to an increase
in organizational productivity (the efficiency and output of employees)
and performance. For example, some time ago, Taco Bell discovered that
its restaurants with high employee retention had twice as many sales as
other stores and had 55 percent higher profits than restaurants with
high turnover. In response to these findings, the company enhanced its
internal service quality by giving employees more latitude for
on-the-job decision-making.

:::: {#note-00005 .note}
::: title
The Great Resignation
:::

You may be aware of the Great Resignation, in which employees are
leaving their jobs in large numbers. Because of the cost to hire, train,
and retain employees, employee retention is a major concern for
organizations. There are many reasons why this is happening, and there
are ways companies can improve to help them retain their employees. Read
these articles from the [Pew Research Center](#), [Forbes](#), and
[Mashable](#) about this shift in employee thinking.

There are corporate strategies companies can take to counteract this
resignation trend. Learn about these strategies from [LinkedIn](#) and
[Family Business](#).
::::

## External Service Value Proposition {#sect-00007}

Customer value is also known as external value proposition. It's the
promise of value that a customer expects a business to deliver.

Think about your last haircut. Why did you choose to get your hair cut
at that particular salon versus a competitor? Certainly, the quality of
the haircut itself was important, but the customer value you experienced
from your stylist played a role. What else factored into your
experience? How about the other behind-the-scenes employees who made it
easy for you to book an appointment or who checked you in efficiently,
the person who kept the salon clean and attractive, and the person who
made it easy for you to pay and perhaps book another appointment when
you were leaving?

That's why employees (both frontline and behind the scenes) play a major
role in ensuring customer value. Satisfied, motivated employees
generally (and genuinely) care about the company and the services it
provides and can convey this to consumers in an honest, positive manner.

## Customer Satisfaction {#sect-00008}

The next two steps (customer satisfaction and customer loyalty) in the
service-profit chain model are related and directly linked. A
dissatisfied customer will not be loyal and will likely not do business
with the company in the future. Conversely, customer loyalty---the
ongoing positive relationship between a customer and business---is a
result of customer satisfaction---or the measure of how happy customers
are with the company's products, services, and capabilities.

The greater the satisfaction from a customer, the more likely they will
return. Additionally, satisfied customers often serve as unofficial
"ambassadors" of the company and will spread the word about their
positive experience.

## Customer Loyalty {#sect-00009}

The definition of customer loyalty is when a person goes to the same
company for subsequent services, even if that service is more expensive
than those of the competitor. The customer makes a deliberate choice to
do repeat business with a company with which they have had positive
experiences, resulting in growth and higher profits for the company.

## Profit and Growth {#sect-00010}

In terms of the service-profit chain model, profit isn't the goal; it's
the result. The formula is really quite simple:

Happy employees result in happy customers.

Happy customers mean repeat business and spreading the word about your
organization.

Repeat (and new) business mean profit and growth for the organization.

The key is to keep employees happy because it leads to company profits.

:::: {#note-00010 .note}
::: title
Putting the Service-Profit Chain to Work
:::

Learn from this [*Harvard Business Review* article](#) about the
connectivity of the service-profit chain links.

Interested in understanding how the model works in other industries?
Read this [*Hospitality News and Business*](#) article about why the
service profit chain is important in the hospitality industry.
::::

:::: {#note-00011 .note}
::: title
Ritz-Carlton
:::

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

Employee empowerment is one of those buzzwords that has become popular
over the last few decades. It's defined as the ways in which an
organization provides its employees with some autonomy and freedom to
make decisions and have some control in their day-to-day activities. For
example, a supermarket may empower its cashiers to match competitors'
ads without approval from a manager for up to a certain dollar amount.

If you were the owner of a business, how much latitude would you give
your employees in helping customers? A lot? A little? None? The
Ritz-Carlton, considered a gold standard for hospitality (see [\#](#)),
allows its employees to spend up to \$2,000 to solve customer problems
without manager approval.

You might be shaking your head right now, trying to understand this. Two
thousand dollars seems like a lot of money to be left to the discretion
of employees, doesn't it? But you may not realize that the average
Ritz-Carlton customer will spend approximately a quarter of a million
dollars with the hotel chain over their lifetime. When you consider that
the customer lifetime value (CLV) of a Ritz-Carlton guest is \$250,000,
that \$2,000 doesn't seem hard to believe, does it?

For more information about Ritz-Carlton and its commitment to customer
service, watch this brief video with Ritz-Carlton founder Horst Schulze
and Yahoo! Finance where he discusses the importance of and value in
caring for customers.

[Ritz-Carlton founder: \'Caring for the customer doesn\'t cost
anything\'](#)
::::

# The Service Marketing Triangle {#sect-00011}

The Service Marketing Triangle is a visual image of a model that speaks
to the importance of people in a company's ability to keep its service
promises (see [\#](#)). It might help to imagine the Service Marketing
Triangle as a three-legged stool. Take out one of the legs, and the
stool won't stand for long. That's the premise and the importance of the
Service Marketing Triangle---all three aspects must be achieved or
exceeded for the customer to be delighted.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

## External Service Marketing---Making Promises {#sect-00012}

External service marketing refers to the promotion of an organization's
services in an external environment where the company promotes its
services to customers through various traditional techniques like
pricing, advertising, direct marketing, public relations, and personal
selling. These marketing techniques are intended to achieve multiple
aims, such as creating and increasing awareness, setting price
expectations, and setting expectations for the level of service to be
delivered.

## Internal Service Marketing---Enabling Promises {#sect-00013}

In a service business, employees are seen as "internal customers." As
you've seen from the discussion on the service-profit chain model, if a
company wants to better serve its customers, it has to start with
satisfying its employees so that they're committed to delivering the
best service possible to external customers. That's the essence of
internal service marketing.

Internal service marketing is the process of motivating employees to
deliver customer value and ensure customer satisfaction by acting as a
team. While that is obviously true for frontline employees who interact
with the customer, it is equally applied to all employees, including
those behind-the-scenes employees who support the frontline employees.
In other words, all employees of an organization need to be empowered so
they can deliver great customer service.

Key components of internal service marketing include motivating
employees, training them in customer satisfaction techniques, ongoing
communication of company goals and objectives, and (of course) good pay
and working conditions.

## Interactive Service Marketing---Keeping Promises {#sect-00014}

Interactive service marketing is the communication between the service
provider and the customer, called a service encounter. The service
encounter is where external marketing promises are either upheld,
exceeded, or broken by employees.

Interactive service marketing is critical because it sets short-term and
long-term customer satisfaction. In its simplest terms, when a customer
is happy in the short term, they are more likely to be happy over the
long term.

Let's review the elements of the Service Marketing Triangle with an
example of a fine-dining restaurant in a major metropolitan area. The
three "parties" involved in the Service Marketing Triangle are the owner
of the restaurant, the restaurant employees, and the diners. As part of
*internal marketing*, the owner may offer training to servers about the
pairing of certain dishes on the menu with wines offered by the
restaurant or hold a "huddle" at the beginning of each shift to train
servers about daily specials and wine pairings. As part of *external
marketing*, diners might be lured to the restaurant through the
restaurant's Facebook page, which touts its extensive list of wines and
the fact that servers are experienced in recommending wines to enhance
the flavor of the menu items. Finally, as part of interactive marketing,
servers are encouraged to give diners full descriptions of all menu
items and daily specials and recommend which wines to pair with their
food choices, leading to a more satisfying dining experience.

:::: {#note-00018 .note}
::: title
Service Marketing Triangle
:::

Check out this brief video about the Service Marketing Triangle model to
gain a better understanding.

[Services Marketing Triangle Explained with Examples](#)
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00015}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00016}

:::: {#rf-013 .note}
::: title
:::

13\.

John Ryder, "Why the Iceberg of Ignorance Is Still Relevant and How to
Melt It,"

Hive

(blog), June 26, 2019, https://www.hive.hr/blog/iceberg-of-ignorance/.
::::

:::: {#rf-014 .note}
::: title
:::

14\.

Will Schmidt, "5 Lessons from Zappos on Employee Happiness," Classy,
accessed October 14, 2021,
https://medium.com/classy-blog/5-lessons-from-zappos-on-employee-happiness-10e3889b7ba
::::

:::: {#rf-015 .note}
::: title
:::

15\.

iGrad Author, "The Cost of Replacing an Employee and the Role of
Financial Wellness,"

The Well

(blog), Enrich Financial Wellness, accessed May 22, 2022,
https://www.enrich.org/blog/The-true-cost-of-employee-turnover-financial-wellness-enrich#:\~:text.
::::

:::: {#rf-016 .note}
::: title
:::

16\.

Nkem Anigbogu, "Understanding the Service-Profit Chain," LinkedIn, March
13, 2018,
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/understanding-service-profit-chain-nkem-anigbogu/.
::::

:::: {#rf-017 .note}
::: title
:::

17\.

Basha Coleman, "How to Write a Great Value Proposition \[5 Top
Examples + Template\]," HubSpot, March 10, 2022,
https://blog.hubspot.com/marketing/write-value-proposition.
::::

:::: {#rf-018 .note}
::: title
:::

18\.

P. Mulder, "Service Profit Chain," Toolshero, October 5, 2018,
https://www.toolshero.com/strategy/service-profit-chain/.
::::

:::: {#rf-019 .note}
::: title
:::

19\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-020 .note}
::: title
:::

20\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-021 .note}
::: title
:::

21\.

Adam Toporek. "The Ritz-Carlton's Famous \$2,000 Rule," Customers That
Stick, September 12, 2017,
https://customersthatstick.com/blog/customer-loyalty/the-ritz-carltons-famous-2000-rule/.
::::

:::: {#rf-022 .note}
::: title
:::

22\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-023 .note}
::: title
:::

23\.

"Services Marketing Triangle," Expert Program Management, accessed
November 11, 2021,
https://expertprogrammanagement.com/2018/03/services-marketing-triangle/.
::::

:::: {#rf-024 .note}
::: title
:::

24\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-025 .note}
::: title
:::

25\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-026 .note}
::: title
:::

26\.

Anam Ahmed, "What Is a Service Marketing Triangle?"

Chron.

, March 8, 2021,
https://smallbusiness.chron.com/service-marketing-triangle-61170.html.
::::

# 

customer loyalty

an ongoing positive relationship between a customer and a business that
drives repeat purchases

customer satisfaction

a measurement that determines how happy customers are with a company's
products, services, and capabilities

employee retention

an organization's ability to retain its employees and stop employees
from leaving

employee satisfaction

the level of happiness and contentment employees have about their jobs
and the work environment

external service marketing

the action of promoting or selling services to customers and potential
customers

external value proposition

the value companies promise to deliver to customers post-purchase

interactive service marketing

the communication between the service provider and the customer; also
called a

service encounter

internal service marketing

satisfying employees to motivate them to work as a team to satisfy
customers

internal service quality

the perceived level of satisfaction an employee experiences with
services offered by internal service providers

productivity

the efficiency and output of employees

service encounter

a consumer's direct contact with a service provider

Service Marketing Triangle

a visual representation of a strategic model that outlines the
importance of people in a company's ability to keep its service promises

service-profit chain model

model that establishes relationships between profitability, employee
satisfaction, loyalty, and productivity
