m00073

580ee23c-3f80-4059-b9f8-15115617605c

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Describe the Gap Model of Service Quality.

List and describe the dimensions of service quality.

# Dimensions of Service Quality {#sect-00002}

While we're still on the subject of customer satisfaction, let's take a
look at still another model that aids marketers in better understanding
customer satisfaction: the Gap Model of Service Quality (sometimes also
known as the Customer Service Gap Model or the Five-Gap Model), first
proposed in 1985. The importance of this model is that it demonstrates
that customer satisfaction is essentially a function of perception. In
other words, if the service provided meets or exceeds customers'
expectations, they will be satisfied; if not, they will be dissatisfied,
likely as a result of one of the customer service gaps presented below.

According to the model (see [\#](#)), there are five major gaps or
potential inconsistencies organizations encounter in seeking to meet
customers' expectations of the customer experience.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

The gaps are:

Gap 1---knowledge gap: the difference between customer expectations and
what managers

think

they expect

Gap 2---policy gap: the difference between management's understanding of
the customer's needs and how they translate that understanding into
service delivery policies and standards for employees

Gap 3---delivery gap: the difference between the experience
specification and the actual results of the service

Gap 4---communication gap: the difference between the delivery of the
customer experience and what is communicated to the customer

Gap 5---customer gap: the difference between the customer's expectations
of the service or experience and their perception of the experience

Let's look at each one of these gaps in a little more detail.

## Gap 1: The Knowledge Gap {#sect-00003}

The knowledge gap is the difference between what customers expect and
what the company *thinks* they expect.The bottom line here is that the
company doesn't know exactly what customers want. This could be due to a
variety of factors---lack of communication between frontline employees
and management, inadequate market research, or simply a failure to
listen to customer feedback, including complaints. For example, a hotel
manager may think that guests want a hot breakfast instead of a
continental breakfast, but the reality is that guests are more concerned
with the cleanliness of their rooms or the speed of the Internet service
at the hotel than they are with breakfast.

## Gap 2: The Policy Gap {#sect-00004}

The policy gap reflects the difference between management's perception
of the customer's needs and the translation of that understanding into
its service delivery policies and standards. Typically, management has
an accurate understanding of what the customer wants, but performance
standards haven't been established that ensure the appropriate employee
behaviors are displayed. Using the hotel example again, assume that a
number of customers have complained that the phone rings innumerable
times before it is answered. Management wants to address this issue, so
it establishes a policy that phones must be answered "quickly." What's
your interpretation of the word *quickly*---two rings, four rings, six
rings? Specificity here is the key.

## Gap 3: The Delivery Gap {#sect-00005}

The delivery gap is the difference between service standards and
policies and the actual delivery of the service. In this situation,
frontline service workers *know* what to do to delight the customer;
they simply aren't doing it. For instance, management may have
established a policy that the front desk phones get answered on or
before the second ring, but the front desk employees are allowing phones
to ring much longer before answering. This gap may arise due to improper
training, lack of capability on the part of employees, unwillingness to
meet the established service standards, or staff shortages.

Southwest Airlines is a great example of this. According to its website,
the mission of the company is "dedication to the highest quality of
Customer Service delivered with a sense of warmth, friendliness,
individual pride and Company Spirit." The company doesn't "overhype" its
service, so there is no delivery gap---the difference between the
experience specification and the actual delivery of its service. This is
demonstrated by the fact that, compared to other airlines, Southwest has
the greatest customer service rating, earning a 33.9 percent excellence
rating.

## Gap 4: The Communication Gap {#sect-00006}

If marketers are doing an effective job in terms of their promotion
efforts, the customer is likely to be highly influenced by that
promotion. The problem now becomes, the company had better deliver. The
communication gap is the difference between the delivery of the service
and what is communicated to the customer. In other words, what did the
company promise versus what did it deliver?

For example, if your coffee shop asserts in its advertising and on its
menu that its food is gluten-free, and it isn't, customer expectations
won't be met. Failure to deliver on a promise hurts the company's
credibility. Former US President Donald Trump wrote, "A brand is two
words: the 'promise' you telegraph, and the 'experience' you deliver."

## Gap 5: The Customer Gap {#sect-00007}

The customer gap is the difference between the customer's expectations
of the service or experience and their perception of the experience
itself. In an ideal world, the customer's expectations would be nearly
identical to their perception, but customer perception is totally
subjective and has been shaped by word of mouth, their personal needs,
and their own past experiences. The problem here is that each individual
perceives their world through their own eyes, and everyone perceives
reality differently. In other words, while reality is a fixed factor,
perception of reality is a variable.

:::: {#note-00008 .note}
::: title
Understanding the Gap Model
:::

Watch this video and learn more about quality of service and the gap
model from Jochen Wirtz, a well-known marketing author.

[Master Class: Service Quality - The Gaps Model & Diagnosing Quality
Shortfalls](#)

Also check out this [article from Indeed about the GAP Model of Service
Quality](#), with examples.
::::

# The RATER Model {#sect-00008}

In their book *Delivering Quality Service,* researchers Valerie
Zeithaml, A. Parasuraman, and Leonard Berry identified five dimensions
of service that customers use when evaluating service quality. Their
research pointed to the fact that these five dimensions result in
service excellence and lead to higher customer loyalty. This model is
sometimes known as the RATER framework of service quality. Refer to
[\#](#) for a visual representation of the RATER framework.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

Let's explore each of these dimensions (represented by the acronym
RATER) in some detail:

## Reliability {#sect-00009}

R, for reliability, depicts the organization's capability to provide
accurate, dependable, and on-time service. Consistency is critical.
Companies that provide on-time, error-free service to customers tend to
have repeat customers. Research has shown that service reliability is
three times more important to customers than the latest equipment or
flashy uniforms. The bottom line when it comes to service reliability
and quality is: Do you deliver as promised?

## Assurance {#sect-00010}

A, for assurance, is the degree to which the organization inspires trust
in its customers. For example, when you take your sick pet to a
veterinarian or have your income tax return prepared (or any other
service, for that matter), you expect the service provider to be an
expert in the service they're delivering. Research has shown that
communicating this expertise to customers is important. If customers
aren't aware of that expertise, they often have less confidence in that
provider, which can lead to a low assessment of that provider's service.

Does your organization inspire confidence in its service providers?
Whether you're a hairstylist, a physical therapist, a tattoo artist, or
any number of other service professions, it's important to communicate
your expertise *before* you do the work. For example, a plumber's
business card may contain the words "licensed, bonded, and insured."
Hairstylists generally display their state licenses in their work space.
Doctors often have framed diplomas in the office from medical school,
residencies, and fellowships. These are all ways in which these service
providers communicate their competencies. Communicating these
competencies to customers helps shape expectations and influence
assessments in advance of the service.

## Tangibles {#sect-00011}

When we talk about tangibles in the RATER model, we're focusing on
factors such as the physical appearance of both the physical facility
and employees. Does your organization present itself professionally?
This is one of the factors in the RATER metric that is hard to define
because it takes into account customers' perceptions, and different
customers may respond in different, subjective ways to the environment
created.

Let's imagine that you're taking that special someone out for a romantic
or special-occasion dinner at a fine-dining restaurant. What tangibles
contribute to that experience? You may expect a knowledgeable, uniformed
staff; soft lighting and background music; an appealing menu; and clean
restrooms. All of these tangibles will factor into your overall
perception of the quality of service you receive.

Another good example of tangibles in terms of the RATER model is the
Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, where tangibles include Warhol
prints on the wall, Chihuly sculptures hanging from the ceiling, and a
professionally attired staff that projects a sense of caring and
expertise. There are 500 original pieces of art from 70 US artists on
display throughout the hospital.

Customer perception isn't the only challenge marketers face in terms of
tangibles. It's also the fact that, done right, customers may not even
notice and point out the tangibles unless their feedback is negative.
That's why listening and acting on customer complaints is critical in
improving an organization's tangibles and promoting a strong customer
service image.

## Empathy {#sect-00012}

Empathy in terms of the RATER model means focusing on customers
attentively to ensure that they receive caring and distinguished
service. It isn't enough to be efficient and thorough in delivering
service to customers---it's also about service providers "connecting"
with customers during delivery of the service and making them feel
valued.

You may have heard the old saying that it's not *what* was said, it's
*how* it was said. The same is true of providing service. For example,
let's go back to the example of that special dinner in the fine-dining
restaurant. Imagine that you accidently spill your beverage all over the
table. A busser is called to clean the spill, change the tablecloth, and
provide you with new silverware and napkins. That busser may have taken
care of those tasks effectively and efficiently but didn't make eye
contact, smile, or ask you if you needed anything else. In this
hypothetical situation, the busser's tasks were performed fully, but you
didn't feel that they cared about your predicament.

## Responsiveness {#sect-00013}

A service staff's desire to treat customers with respect and provide
satisfactory and quick service speaks to their responsiveness. This
dimension focuses on promptness and willingness. Accordingly, the
organization has to ensure that customers are getting quick service,
without delay, and with an effort that makes customers believe the
company genuinely wants to help them.

Responsiveness is directly in line with the amount of time that
customers wait for an answer or a solution. Have you ever called an
organization with a service question and had to play "20 Questions" with
the company's automated phone system? You know the drill---press 1 for
option A, press 2 for option B, press 3 for option C, etc. The chances
are that your patience evaporated after about the fourth telephone
prompt and you were left screaming "Representative" into your phone.
That's a classic example of a company that needs to focus on its
responsiveness if it wants to generate customer loyalty.

:::: {#note-00018 .note}
::: title
Applying the RATER Model to Real-World Companies
:::

Check out this video about Disney guest service and the RATER model.

[Disney Guest Service With RATER](#)

Also look at this [article that applies the RATER model](#) to Amazon,
Thermomix, Apple, and a bank.
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00014}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00015}

:::: {#rf-027 .note}
::: title
:::

27\.

"What Is the GAP Model of Service Quality? (With Examples)," Indeed
Career Guide, November 23, 2021,
https://www.indeed.com/career-advice/career-development/gap-model.
::::

:::: {#rf-028 .note}
::: title
:::

28\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-029 .note}
::: title
:::

29\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-030 .note}
::: title
:::

30\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-031 .note}
::: title
:::

31\.

Sean Peek, "What Your Business Can Learn from Southwest Airlines,"
Business.com, August 2, 2022,
https://www.business.com/articles/southwest-airlines-great-customer-service/.
::::

:::: {#rf-032 .note}
::: title
:::

32\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-033 .note}
::: title
:::

33\.

Donald Trump, "A brand is two words: The 'promise' you telegraph, and
the 'experience' you deliver," Minimalist Quotes, accessed February 27,
2022, https://minimalistquotes.com/donald-trump-quote-18890/.
::::

:::: {#rf-034 .note}
::: title
:::

34\.

Arlen, C. (2018, July 2). The 5 service dimensions all customers care
about. Retrieved November 11, 2021, from
https://www.serviceperformance.com/the-5-service-dimensions-all-customers-care-about/.
::::

:::: {#rf-035 .note}
::: title
:::

35\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-036 .note}
::: title
:::

36\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-037 .note}
::: title
:::

37\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-038 .note}
::: title
:::

38\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-039 .note}
::: title
:::

39\.

Mary Carole McCauley, "New Hopkins Hospital Takes an Artful Approach to
Health Care,"

Baltimore Sun

, April 26, 2012,
https://www.baltimoresun.com/health/bs-xpm-2012-04-27-bs-hs-hopkins-art-20120427-41-story.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-040 .note}
::: title
:::

40\.

"Measuring Customer Service Quality with the RATER Framework,"
Simplesat, accessed November 11, 2021,
https://www.simplesat.io/measuring-customer-service-quality-rater-framework/.
::::

:::: {#rf-041 .note}
::: title
:::

41\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-042 .note}
::: title
:::

42\.

M. M. Kobiruzzaman, "Five Dimensions of Service Quality---Servqual Model
of Service Quality," Newsmoor, September 15, 2020,
https://newsmoor.com/servqual-model-five-key-service-dimensions-servqual-gaps-reasons/.
::::

# 

assurance

in terms of the RATER model, the degree to which an organization
inspires trust in its customers

communication gap

in the Gap Model of Service Quality, the variance between what is
communicated to the customer and their actual experience

customer gap

in the Gap Model of Service Quality, the variance between the customer's
expectations and their perception of the service

delivery gap

in the Gap Model of Service Quality, the difference between the
experience specification and the actual delivery of the service

empathy

in terms of the RATER model, focusing on customers attentively to assure
they receive caring and distinguished service

GAP Model of Service Quality

theoretical marketing model that helps to identify the gaps between the
perceived service and the expected service

knowledge gap

in the GAP Model of Service Quality, the difference between what
customers expect and what managers think they expect

policy gap

in the GAP Model of Service Quality, the difference between managers
understanding customer needs and being able to turn that into service
delivery practices

RATER framework of service quality

theoretical model that focuses on the five dimensions of service
excellence: reliability, assurance, tangibles, empathy, and
responsiveness

reliability

in terms of the RATER model, the organization's capability to produce an
accurate, dependable, and on-time service

responsiveness

in terms of the RATER model, promptness and willingness to provide
satisfactory and quick service

tangibles

in terms of the RATER model, the physical appearance of both the
facility and its employees
