m00074

eeabd478-16ff-4fcb-a907-d393d94edb7d

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Describe the ethical considerations in providing services to customers.

Discuss how ethics contribute to customer satisfaction.

# How Do Ethics Contribute to Customer Satisfaction? {#sect-00002}

In 2019, AT&T ran a series of TV commercials featuring a variety of
professionals who don't quite "make the grade." These commercials
included a surgeon who has "almost" been reinstated and a tax
professional who will get your taxes into an "okay" place when his audit
is over. The catchphrase is each of these commercials was "Just OK is
not OK." The same is true of an organization's ethical culture. Do you
want your ethical culture to be "just OK"?

In this chapter, we've been talking about the importance of building
customer loyalty, which drives profitability and growth. But what about
the link between ethics and customer loyalty? Ethics are becoming
central to consumers, employees, and a company's reputation (and hence
its ability to gain customer loyalty). New research from Mintel, a
market intelligence agency, reveals that over half of US consumers stop
buying from companies they perceive to be unethical. Talk about a
wake-up call!

# Service Excellence through Ethics {#sect-00003}

Obviously, ethics matter. But how do you ensure that those ethics are
instilled and demonstrated by your employees, particularly those
frontline employees who interact directly with the customer? The
National Ethics Association (NEA) has two suggestions. First, within
your ethics program, make customer service a core component. Second,
promote values and ethics, and include them within the rules for your
frontline workers along with the consequences if they aren't followed.

According to the NEA, steps can include the following:

Identifying customer service behaviors that are unethical, like lying to
customers or failing to display sensitivity to customers with problems.

Training employees on an ongoing basis in desired behaviors.

Ensuring customers know that promises aren't empty words but rather a
commitment to their satisfaction.

Monitoring interactions between frontline employees and customers to
spot ethical gaps, especially in times of high stress and work volume.

Leading by example. It's not enough to just "talk the talk" when it
comes to ethical behavior within the organization; managers also need to
"walk the talk." It's important to "walk the talk" of ethical behavior
as a model for employees when dealing with customers' complaints and
problems.

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Royal Caribbean Group is another company that takes its ethical behavior
seriously. It has a Code of Business Conduct and Ethics decree that
connects its core values (fairness, integrity, honesty, and
trustworthiness) to all of its actions. Chairman and CEO Richard Fain
reaffirms its commitment to integrity and an ethical culture and states,
"Simply complying with the law is not enough; we need to be ABC (Above
and Beyond Compliance)." Beyond just words, however, the company has
established an ethics hotline managed by The Network, a leading
third-party hotline provider. Through the use of this ethics hotline,
employees can anonymously report their concerns about ethics violations
24 hours a day, 7 days a week, by either telephone or the Internet.

:::: {#note-00006 .note}
::: title
Royal Caribbean
:::

Read more about [Royal Caribbean's Code of Business Conduct and Ethics
on its website](#).

Also, [read this article on the potential ethical issues](#) specific to
service marketing.
::::

:::::: {#note-00007 .note}
::: title
Nasco Gulf
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

You may not be familiar with Nasco Gulf, a leading insurance agent in
Dubai, but the company stands out in its Customer Service Code of
Conduct (see [\#](#)). The "customer service mission is to provide
customers with timely, responsive service with integrity, simplicity,
and a passion for excellence while meeting or exceeding the customer's
expectations."

The principles upon which Nasco serves its customers are trust,
understanding, and resolve. The following is from its Customer Service
Fundamental Principles:

"Trust---I work hard to gain and maintain customer trust in us . . .

Understand---I understand our customers and their needs . . .

Resolve---I solve our customer's problems, even if the solution is
difficult"

:::: {#note-00009 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Nasco lists its values on its website for all to see. The company
outlines that its word is good, it is a bold partner, it works to earn
loyalty, and it focuses on what matters. For more information about
Nasco Gulf, [visit the Nasco Gulf website.](#)
::::::

:::: {#note-00010 .note}
::: title
When It Goes Wrong
:::

We have all heard the stories where companies poorly handled a customer
issue, and you can easily find numerous videos where customers have
recorded a company's poor customer service. Here are a few articles that
share some of the more well-known stories:

CBS News

RingCentral

Forbes
::::

#  {#sect-00004}

In this chapter, we explore services. One of the first concepts is that
services are intangible, meaning that they cannot be felt, tasted,
heard, or smelled before purchase. Customer satisfaction is dependent
upon many factors, the first one being the communication of what can be
expected by the customer and the actual customer experience. It can be
considered a communication gap when customer expectations and
experiences do not match. This gap is the first point in the Gap Model
of Service Quality. The second point is based on the perception of
service received versus customer expectations. Other issues covered in
this model are service quality, knowledge, and policies.

Service goes a long way in building customer satisfaction and loyalty;
without returning customers, a business is doomed to struggle and fail.

Employees are responsible for a sizable amount of what goes into
satisfaction at the customer level. One of the key points is employee
satisfaction and retention. A more engaged, happier employee delivers a
higher level of customer service. This is an additional point that
employers are measuring. The act of internal service marketing is a
concept that many have not experienced. This covers the activities that
the company engages in to keep employees involved with delivering the
desired level of service.

External service marketing is the act of promoting or selling services
to the customer. This is a well-known concept both inside and outside
the company.

Services can be further examined with the understanding of the following
concepts: Services are inseparable; they are produced and consumed at
the same time. They are intangible, which means that they cannot be
touched, felt, heard, tasted, or smelled before purchase. They are
perishable, so they cannot be stored in inventory for future use or
sale. They are variable, meaning that the service depends on who
provides them, as well as when, where, and how. These concepts help to
explain the complexities of marketing services and satisfying the
consumer.

#  {#sect-00006}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00005}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00007}

"Communication is the act or process of using words, sounds, signs, or
behaviors to express or exchange information or to express your ideas,
thoughts, feelings, etc., to someone else." What type of communicator
are you? Analytical? Intuitive? Functional? Personal? Research
communication styles and describe which best describes you. Outline a
plan on how you might communicate with those who adhere to a different
style. To get started, try this free communication style
[assessment](#). There are also other assessments available online, so
try a few and see and see if there are any differences.

Keep in mind that communication also includes nonverbal signs such as
our facial expressions and body language. How does your body position
change when communicating a happy story versus a sad story? Try this
body language [self-assessment](#).

A large percentage of our personal brand comes from how we communicate
with others. Think about the people you admire; odds are they
communicate in a way that you understand and relate to. Work on becoming
comfortable in your style and recognizing the styles of others. If you
do this, others will be comfortable with you, and they will remember
you. Often, a key component to a promotion is being noticed and
remembered for the personal brand you exhibit.

#  {#sect-00008}

Considering that "70% of small businesses are operated and owned by a
single person," the question arises: Who is doing the marketing?

Find at least two small service businesses, one that you know to be
successful and one that might be hanging on by a thread (hair salons,
dry cleaners, mechanics, party planners, florists, etc.). Call and see
if you can arrange a time, either on the phone or in person, to ask
questions about their marketing efforts. You might want to do a bit of
homework before you do. Here are questions that will help you gather
information:

Do they consider what they do to promote their business as marketing?

Do they have someone who helps them?

Do they have a website or Facebook page?

What are the main activities that they do to market their business?

Do they have a formal business plan? A budget?

How do they figure out what their budget should look like?

Are there efforts that they consider successful and anything that
seriously did not work?

Do they respond to the marketing of their competitors?

Of course, there are additional questions that you can ask as time
permits. The idea here is to get a good look at what the challenges are
to marketing a small business. Is this something that you see yourself
doing---perhaps even as a business of your own?

#  {#sect-00009}

## Adventist Health Castle {#sect-00010}

Adventist Health Castle in Kailua, Hawaii, is an award-winning hospital
focused on serving the mind, body, and spirit of its patients. The 300
physicians provide services to the entire island of Oahu, following the
mission to "care for the community and share God's love."

Adventist Health Castle offers programs in wellness and lifestyle,
cutting-edge weight-loss procedures, and advanced imaging techniques.
All programs come with a patient-focused approach with compassion and
dedication from its health team. The mission statement of "transforming
the health experience of our community by improving health, enhancing
interactions and making care more accessible" is accomplished through
"integrity, compassion, respect, and excellence." In 2017, it won the
Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award, an award that recognizes the
excellent patient care the staff provides to the community.

Adventist Health Castle is proud of its Wellness and Lifestyle Medicine
center because of the variety of health education and lifestyle
resources it provides for the community. It offers classes, events, and
services to the public for a small fee or often for free. Check out more
[here](#) about the medical services it offers.

Health systems are a product of the community they serve, and Adventist
Health Castle is no exception. To help with its cause, it developed a
community needs assessment to understand the concerns and needs of the
populations within its service area. From that work, it has developed
numerous programs and events, including diabetes care classes and
improved access to health services. It also added ENT, cardiology, and
dental services to its Rural Health Clinic in Laie. With this addition
of the new Rural Health Clinic, Adventist's system served 2,432 unique
patients in its first year.

With its work, Adventist Health Castle expanded access to classes to
include a center in Kaneohe. Multiple locations allow the health system
to extend its reach to the community with more classes and events. And
it's working! Through a postcard mailing, Adventist received a positive
response to class enrollment.

Another initiative created around better access to care included having
physician practices add more office hours to include evenings and
weekends. Through this effort, Adventist has been able to engage with
more patients and coordinate care better for the populations it serves.

With this work, the community has seen many positive outcomes including
increased overall health due to the greater availability of healthy
center resources. Serving a community means adapting to the needs of the
community and meeting the populations where they are most vulnerable.

## Case Questions {#sect-00011}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00012}

:::: {#rf-043 .note}
::: title
:::

43\.

"56% of Americans Stop Buying from Brands They Believe Are Unethical,"
Mintel, November 18, 2015,
https://www.mintel.com/press-centre/social-and-lifestyle/56-of-americans-stop-buying-from-brands-they-believe-are-unethical.
::::

:::: {#rf-044 .note}
::: title
:::

44\.

National Ethics Association, "Customer Service Ethics: Beware the Dark
Side," December 2, 2011,
https://www.ethics.net/articles/customer-service-ethics-beware-the-dark-side.
::::

:::: {#rf-045 .note}
::: title
:::

45\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-046 .note}
::: title
:::

46\.

Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd.,

Code of Business Conduct and Ethics

, 2019,
https://www.rclinvestor.com/content/uploads/2019/09/COBE_Eng-2019_Clean_Final.pdf.
::::

:::: {#rf-047 .note}
::: title
:::

47\.

Chief Executive Office \[username\], "Royal Caribbean Ethics Hotline,"
Ship Happens forum, September 29, 2014,
http://www.inozemstvo-posao.com/smf_1-1-2_install/index.php?topic=9533.0.
::::

:::: {#rf-048 .note}
::: title
:::

48\.

Nasco Gulf,

Customer Service Code of Conduct

, accessed November 11, 2021,
http://www.nascogulf.com/Content/uploads/NASCO_Customer_Service_Code_of_Conduct\_-\_V1.pdf.
::::

:::: {#rf-049 .note}
::: title
:::

49\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-050 .note}
::: title
:::

50\.

Merriam-Webster

, "communication," accessed March 8, 2022,
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/communication.
::::

:::: {#rf-051 .note}
::: title
:::

51\.

Deyan Georgiev, "Small Business Statistics \[Guide to Success in
2022\]," Review42, May 12, 2022,
https://review42.com/resources/small-business-statistics/.
::::

:::: {#rf-052 .note}
::: title
:::

52\.

"Home page," Adventist Health Castle,
https://www.adventisthealth.org/castle.
::::

:::: {#rf-053 .note}
::: title
:::

53\.

"About Us: Mission, Vision, and Values," Adventist Health Castle,
accessed May 5, 2022,
https://www.adventisthealth.org/castle/about-us/mission-vision-values
::::

:::: {#rf-054 .note}
::: title
:::

54\.

Adventist Health Castle,

2019 Community Health Plan Update

, 2019,
https://www.adventisthealth.org/documents/community-benefit/2019-chp-update-ar/Castle_2019_Community-Health-Plan-Update-Annual-Report.pdf.
::::
