m00026

f926805f-65ed-4b1d-afc8-da1107267074

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

To begin this chapter, we are going to look at an example of a
well-known company that successfully used market segmentation to appeal
to a very specific consumer market as a way to revive one of its
products.

Mattel Inc. is the producer of popular children's toys like Hot Wheels,
Barbie, and Max Steel. Its action figure Max Steel was introduced in
1999 to only modest success in the United States, but it was enormously
popular in South America, even outselling the company's top lines---Hot
Wheels and Barbie. Nearly a decade later, marketers decided to revive
the brand in the United States, hoping for a second chance at success.

Mattel used a number of important market segmentation variables and
market strategies to appeal to its target market. First, in terms of
demographic variables, marketers recognized that the Max Steel figure
typically appealed to boys (gender segmentation) between the ages of 6
and 11 (age segmentation), so they decided to focus on this segment by
developing a website that included games, character biographies, and
other features popular with boys in this age bracket.

Market research also revealed that its target audience was interested in
superheroes and enjoyed watching videos and playing video games centered
around these superheroes, so the company used psychographic and
lifestyle segmentation to appeal to this segment. For example, Mattel
created a Disney Channel cartoon for Max Steel so that, months before
the relaunch of the product in the United States, its target market was
already familiar with the character and was more likely to buy (or
pressure their parents to buy) the action figure. The result? Max Steel
has become a minor superhero "staple" in toy aisles, cartoons, and
movies.

# Endnotes {#sect-00001}

:::: {#rf-001 .note}
::: title
:::

1\.

Gregory Schmidt, "Mattel Is Reviving Max Steel Action Figure for a New
Media Age,"

New York Times

, January 27, 2013.
::::

:::: {#rf-002 .note}
::: title
:::

2\.

Sophia Chianese, "Market Segmentation: Mattel Case Study," LinkedIn,
September 28, 2018,
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/market-segmentation-mattel-case-study-sophia-chianese/.
::::
