m00027

fca42ec7-4103-45fd-a5a7-5a6a841ad259

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define market segmentation.

Describe the benefits of market segmentation.

Discuss methods of segmenting consumer markets.

# Market Segmentation Defined {#sect-00002}

You may have heard the saying "You can't be all things to all people."
That sums up the essence and purpose of market segmentation---the
process of dividing a target market into smaller, more precisely defined
groups of consumers or organizations who have common needs and are
expected to respond similarly to a marketing action.

# The Advantages of Market Segmentation to the Organization {#sect-00003}

It's estimated that the average person sees an astounding 4,000--10,000
advertising messages each day. That's why it's critical to target the
right market. Most marketers have limited advertising budgets, so using
one marketing message to reach a broad audience may garner a few new
customers, but it's likely to come at a high advertising cost.

Consider a company that makes woodworking tools for the professional or
home hobbyist. The company would waste a lot of money placing ads in
"general interest" magazines like *Reader's Digest* because the average
reader likely has little interest in woodworking tools. A better bet
would be placing ads in specialty magazines like *The Family Handyman*
(published by the same company as *Reader's Digest*), *Wood Magazine*,
or *Popular Woodworking*--- publications aimed at professional
woodworkers and hobbyists. Not only would it likely cost less to
advertise in specialty magazines like these, but the ads would be more
relevant to the company's desired customer base.

There are other benefits to market segmentation. Let's look at a few:

Improved Focus on the "Important" Customers.

Customers are not all alike. Some will love your product or service,
while others will be indifferent. Instead of trying to appeal to
everyone, market segmentation enables marketers to focus their efforts
and resources on those customers who will likely result in revenue for
the company.

Improved Product Development.

Market segmentation allows marketers to better understand what consumers
want in a product or service, and that knowledge enables the marketer to
make recommendations for refinements to existing products and services
to meet those needs. This knowledge is equally important in terms of
designing

new

products and services to meet the needs of the target market.

Improved Brand Loyalty.

When customers feel that your company's products or services are a good
fit for them, they are more likely to stick with your brand and
recommend it to others.

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

# Methods of Segmenting Consumer Markets {#sect-00004}

There are several different types of marketing segments you can create.
We'll focus on four major types:

Geographic segmentation: the "where"

Demographic segmentation: the "who"

Behavioral segmentation: the "how"

Psychographic segmentation: the "why"

## Geographic Segmentation: The "Where" {#sect-00005}

Let's first take a look at geographic segmentation, or dividing the
market based on where your customers or potential customers live. There
are several geographic parameters a marketer can use to focus their
marketing efforts, including location, cultural preferences, climate,
language, and population type and density (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Let's explore each of these individually.

Segmenting the market on the basis of location can be as small as a
county or zip code or as large as a country. Segmenting a market this
way can also be used to identify a new geographic location into which
the business may wish to expand.

Starbucks is a great example of a company that uses location
segmentation. First, the company segments its markets according to
global geographic segmentation---the Americas, China, and Asia Pacific
and Europe, the Middle East, and Africa. Each of these segments is then
subject to sub-segmentation in order to cater to markets that share
cultural preferences. For example, in China, where tea tends to be the
beverage of choice, Starbucks offers a lengthy menu of tea-based drinks
like Red Bean Green Tea Frappuccino and Black Tea Latte. In South Korea,
where consumers prefer creamy beverages, Starbucks offers Jeju Honey
Peanut Latte and Happy Cheese White Mocha.

Customers' choices and market behavior can also be influenced by their
location in terms of climate or season. Segmenting the market this way
also allows the marketer to present the most relevant information to the
audience. There's not much of a need for snowmobiles during the summer,
even in northern climates, and not much demand for convertibles in the
middle of winter in those same northern climates. In the same manner,
companies that sell beachwear are more likely to record increased sales
during the summer and in warmer climates.

Language can be used to segment a market geographically. For instance,
there are a number of different languages spoken in different regions
and states in India. Therefore, it stands to reason that an
advertisement in the Hindi language would miss the mark in states where
Assamese or Telugu is spoken. These advertisements would need to be
translated for people in different regions. To give you an idea of the
complexity of this, however, there are more than 19,500 languages or
dialects spoken in India and 121 languages spoken by 10,000 people or
more!

Finally, the marketer can segment the market on the basis of population
type or density---in other words, whether the market is urban, suburban,
or rural. Think about this in terms of a company that does home lawn
treatments like fertilization, weed control, or grub control. That
company would likely have more success targeting a suburban area where
residents need extra yard care. It would be less successful in an urban
area where residents have smaller yards or maybe no yards at all!

## Demographic Segmentation: The "Who" {#sect-00006}

Now let's look at dividing a market on the basis of demographic
segmentation (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

With demographic segmentation, the marketer will divide the market into
smaller groups, generally on the basis of common demographic factors
such as gender, income, age, educational level, race, religion,
ethnicity, occupation or job type, and even family structure. These
smaller segments enable marketers to focus their efforts and resources
on those customers who will likely result in revenue for the company.

With gender segmentation, the market is divided into men and women.
Those who identify as men and those who identify as women have different
interests in terms of shopping for various products like apparel, shoes,
and food. For example, look at the ad campaigns crafted toward women in
fashion magazines such as *Vogue* or *Vanity Fair*. You'll likely see a
different ad focus in magazines like *GQ* or *Men's Health*.

Income segmentation involves segmenting the market on the basis of
monthly or yearly income. With income data, a company can determine how
its potential consumer base spends money on both the high and low ends
of the spectrum. Mercedes-Benz is a classic example of this as it
markets different car models at different price points: A-Class vehicles
starting in the low \$30,000 range, C-Class in the \$40,000--\$55,000
range, E-Class in the \$55,000--\$72,000 range, and, finally, its
S-Class vehicles, which are priced at \$95,000 and up.

Age is another common factor used to segment consumers. It's likely no
surprise to you that our preferences change with age. The products that
appeal to us as teens or young adults are likely not the same products
that appeal to us when we're older. The age segmentation is threefold:

Age Range.

This type of segmentation represents a specific age group, such as
children, teens, adults, and older adults. However, you also need to
consider "perceived age" (i.e., how old you feel) versus "actual age"
(i.e., your chronological age). Purchases tend to reflect our perceived
age rather than our chronological age.

Life Cycle or Life Stage.

In the same way that our preferences change with age, they change with
our life stage, and most people typically pass through many life stages,
from childhood to adolescence to young adult, middle age, and older
adult. This type of segmentation can be a little tricky, however,
particularly in view of stereotypes and changing family dynamics. For
instance, some teens or young adults may be parents, while middle-aged
adults may be starting families, having second families, becoming empty
nesters, or are single (or single again).

Generation Based.

This method of breakdown defines age by generation, such as baby
boomers, millennials, and Generation X. Consumers within generations
will differ slightly in age (for example, baby boomers were born between
1946 and 1964, and Gen Xers were born between 1965 and 1980

:::: {#note-00008 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

), but these generational cohorts still tend to share certain
characteristics and ideas.

Education is another means through which marketers can segment a market,
and it also affects the channels through which marketers reach the
target market. For example, if you were going to open a bookstore in
your hometown, you'd want to determine the average educational level in
your community as part of your due diligence. Are most of your would-be
customers elementary or middle school students? Their tastes in reading
will be considerably different than if you live in a college town
populated by a number of literary professors who prefer the classics.

Race, ethnicity, and religion can be used to segment a market. It's
always dangerous to stereotype, but consumers of different races,
ethnicities, and religions have different preferences and needs.
Consider a company like Zondervan, a leading bible publisher. It would
make sense for the company to segment its market based upon religion
because it offers products that complement the religious beliefs of a
particular group. Likewise, IMAN Cosmetics is designed for women with
darker skin tones, so its target market would likely be women of color.

Marketers can also segment the market based on occupation or job type.
Focusing on a smaller segment of the market enables a company to make
better use of its limited resources. For example, AllHeart is a producer
of medical scrubs, nursing uniforms, shoes, and medical accessories, so
it has segmented the market to focus on medical professionals. Another
example can be found with Saf-Gard, a producer of safety shoes and work
boots that meet or exceed safety standards. This company targets workers
in the construction and farming industries.

Finally, a company can segment its market on the basis of family
structure, marital status, whether there are children in the home, and
the life stages of those in each family.

## Behavioral Segmentation: The "How" {#sect-00007}

Behavioral segmentation divides consumers into market segments depending
on their behavior patterns when interacting with a product or service
(see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

The behavioral pattern benefit segmentation focuses on which benefits or
features of a product or service are most applicable to the customer.
Consider toothpaste. People who buy toothpaste may do so for a variety
of reasons---sensitive teeth, tartar control, whitening, fresh breath,
cavity prevention, etc. This means that two consumers may look identical
in terms of their demographics but could have very different values
regarding the benefits and features that are most important to them.

For example, Procter & Gamble markets various formulations of its Crest
brand toothpaste, including Crest Kids, Gum Detoxify Deep Clean, Gum and
Breath Purify Deep Clean, and more. Marketing messages sharing the
toothpaste's benefits and differences are tailored for each formulation.

Occasion segmentation divides consumers (or potential consumers) on the
basis of the occasions when they make purchases or plan to buy. Occasion
marketing is huge because marketers know that consumers will be
purchasing certain items on certain occasions. Just look at the number
of Internet or TV ads advertising chocolates, flowers, and jewelry in
the weeks preceding Valentine's Day or the sudden appearance of PEEPS
and chocolate bunnies before Easter.

Usage-based segmentation identifies various segments of users based on
how much they use a product. Consumers are typically divided into groups
of non-, light, medium, and heavy product users. As a general rule,
companies target heavy users because, although heavy users may be a
relatively small percentage of the market, they generally account for a
high percentage of total buying. This is actually called the Pareto
principle in marketing, which asserts that 80 percent of a company's
revenue comes from the top 20 percent of repeat or loyal customers.

:::: {#note-00012 .note}
::: title
Pareto Principle
:::

Regardless of which area of business you go into, the Pareto principle
is a concept you will encounter often. It's a concept people adopt in
their life and in management. Check out these resources to learn more:

Simply Psychology article:

Pareto Principle (The 80-20 Rule)

Better Than Yesterday video: The Pareto Principle---80/20 Rule---Do More
by Doing Less

[The Pareto Principle - 80/20 Rule - Do More by Doing Less
(animated)](#)

Fresh Books Blog article:

How to Increase Productivity Using the Pareto Principle

HubSpot article:

What Is the 80/20 Rule? How the Pareto Principles Will Supercharge Your
Productivity
::::

## Psychographic Segmentation: The "Why" {#sect-00008}

Psychographic segmentation breaks down consumer groups into segments
that influence buying behaviors, such as lifestyle, personality
variables, and values (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

A person's lifestyle provides insight on what they value, or how they
spend their time and money. Marketers analyze three lifestyle
dimensions, commonly called AIO (activities, interests, and opinions)
variables:

Activities.

Activities focus on a person's daily routine and/or hobbies. For
instance, if you're an urban dweller who rides your bike to work and
works out regularly, your buying patterns are probably going to be
vastly different from someone who drives to work and doesn't work out.

Interests.

Interests drive passions. What are your interests? Crypto investing?
Gaming? Photography? That's important information to marketers because
by identifying your interests (assuming you're a target consumer), they
can more easily determine what marketing messages will appeal to you.

Opinions.

Opinions matter, and especially in the age of social media, opinions
spread fast. Companies monitor social media sites to gain insight about
consumers' opinions of their products or services and respond
accordingly---and quickly! Companies such as

PepsiCo

and

Mastercard

continuously monitor 24/7 all social media postings about their
companies, products, and competitors worldwide.

:::: {#note-00013 .note}
::: title
Social Media Segmentation
:::

There are a number of ways to segment social media markets. Read more
about it on HubSpot: "[8 Simple Ways to Segment Your Social Media
Audience."](#) Understanding how social media influences market
segmentation is critical. [Read this article from Marketing Tech](#) to
gain insight.
::::

Marketers can also segment a market based on personality variables to
create a group of people with similar personality traits because
personality and purchasing habits are strongly related. To illustrate
this, look at the fitness tool Mirror. This interactive home trainer has
performed well in the market since its inception in 2018 because it
targets those people who want to work out but can't find the time to go
to the gym.

:::: {#note-00014 .note}
::: title
Personality Segmentation
:::

Harley-Davidson is another great example of a company that segments its
market based on personality. Check out this video from Harley-Davidson
as an example of how it is sending a message that resonates with
motorcycle riders.

[2021 Low Rider S \| Harley-Davidson](#)
::::

Values are the principles and important things that influence the way
you live and work. As one example, environmental concerns are becoming a
value issue for consumers, and they are looking for products from
companies that are better for the earth. Knowing this, IKEA has
incorporated a furniture buyback and resale program in the United
States. If you have a piece of IKEA furniture that's an oldie but still
a goody and you want to retire it, IKEA will buy it back and help you
pave the way toward sustainable living.Another great example is
Lululemon's Like New program. You can bring in any used Lululemon gear,
trade it in at the store, get an eGift card for use at a Lululemon
store, and 100 percent of the Like New profits are reinvested in the
company's sustainability initiatives.

In addition to the AIO model of psychographic segmentation, there is
another model known as VALS (values, attitudes, and lifestyles) that
segments consumers into eight different types (as shown in [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00005">

</figure>

The premise of VALS is relatively simple: if you know what consumers are
thinking, you will know which promotions or marketing messages will
attract them to your product or service. And you can use the framework
to determine what consumers are thinking by determining their values,
attitudes, and lifestyles.

Let's take a look at these eight consumer types:

Innovators

are characterized by high income and high resources. These innovators
have definite individual tastes and preferences and are motivated to
achieve the "finer things" in life.

Thinkers

are consumers who have resources and are motivated by their knowledge.

Believers

are subtly different from thinkers in that thinkers typically make their
own decisions, whereas believers look to their peers for affirmation of
their decisions. They have fewer resources than innovators or thinkers.

Achievers

tend to be high-resource consumers who want to excel, both at the
workplace and within their families. They are likely to purchase brands
that have stood the test of time in terms of their success in the
marketplace.

Strivers

tend to be lower-resource consumers. They have similar values as
achievers but lack the same level of resources.

Experiencers

have relatively high resources and want to experience "being different."
The majority of experiencers are young adults.

Makers

, like experiencers, want self-expression, but they lack the resources
to make that happen, so they tend to be more focused on building a
better family than spending money.

Survivors

have the least number of resources and are the least likely to adopt
innovative products. Survivors tend to be brand-loyal customers.

:::: {#note-00018 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

# Using Multiple Segmentation Bases {#sect-00009}

Keep in mind that a company doesn't have to use just one or two
segmentation bases; it can use all of them or a mix of them, a process
that's also known as multi-segment marketing. It's not uncommon for
companies to develop products that compete against their own offerings
as long as the new products offer different perceived benefits to
consumers. For instance, Procter & Gamble sells several different types
of laundry detergent, such as Tide, Gain, and Cheer. Each of these
brands offers different benefits like all-temperature use, fresh scent,
unscented, stain removal, or whitening. By having these different
brands, P&G can appeal to multiple target markets.

:::: {#note-00019 .note}
::: title
Market Research Analyst
:::

What does a market research analyst do, you might ask? They study
markets and data to determine potential new opportunities for a company.
According to the [Bureau of Labor Statistics](#), the typical
entry-level education required is a bachelor's degree, and there are
about 741,000 jobs with an expected growth rate of 22 percent from 2020
to 2030. This article from Coursera, "[What Is a Marketing Analyst? And
How to Become One](#)," outlines job roles and responsibilities,
compares this job to other types of analyst jobs, and describes steps
for how to become a marketing analyst.

Watch these videos to learn about the typical marketing analyst job
description and how to become one.

[Digital Marketing Analyst Job Description](#)

[What Does a Marketing Analyst Do?! (Job Description and How to Become
One)](#)
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00010}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00011}

:::: {#rf-003 .note}
::: title
:::

3\.

Jon Simpson, "Finding Brand Success in the Digital World,"

Forbes

, August 25, 2017,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbesagencycouncil/2017/08/25/finding-brand-success-in-the-digital-world/.
::::

:::: {#rf-004 .note}
::: title
:::

4\.

"What Are the Benefits of Market Segmentation?," Kadence International,
last modified October 14, 2021,
https://kadence.com/en-us/the-benefits-of-market-segmentation/.
::::

:::: {#rf-005 .note}
::: title
:::

5\.

Adam Jones, "Starbucks's Geographic Segment Update," Yahoo! Finance,
Yahoo, January 20, 2015,
https://finance.yahoo.com/news/starbucks-geographic-segment-173101323.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-006 .note}
::: title
:::

6\.

Cathy Jacobs, "What Is a Starbucks Menu Like around the World?," The
Spruce Eats, updated September 17, 2020,
https://www.thespruceeats.com/starbucks-menu-guide-766068.
::::

:::: {#rf-007 .note}
::: title
:::

7\.

Jo Hartley, "Indian Languages: A Useful Guide to All the Languages
Spoken in India,"

Berlitz Blog

, Berlitz, October 31, 2021,
https://www.berlitz.com/blog/indian-languages-spoken-list.
::::

:::: {#rf-008 .note}
::: title
:::

8\.

"More Than 19,500 Mother Tongues Spoken in India: Census,"

Indian Express

, July 1, 2018,
https://indianexpress.com/article/india/more-than-19500-mother-tongues-spoken-in-india-census-5241056/.
::::

:::: {#rf-009 .note}
::: title
:::

9\.

"2021 Mercedes-Benz Price List," Mercedes-Benz of Chandler, accessed
October 20, 2021,
https://www.mercedesbenzofchandler.com/manufacturer-information/mercedes-benz-price-list/.
::::

:::: {#rf-010 .note}
::: title
:::

10\.

Michael T. Robinson, "The Generations: Which Generation are You?,"
CareerPlanner.com, updated October 21, 2017,
https://www.careerplanner.com/Career-Articles/Generations.cfm.
::::

:::: {#rf-011 .note}
::: title
:::

11\.

John Li, "Demographic Segmentation," PickFu, updated May 25, 2021,
https://www.pickfu.com/demographic-segmentation.
::::

:::: {#rf-012 .note}
::: title
:::

12\.

"A Toothpaste for Every Need," Crest US, Procter & Gamble, accessed July
2, 2022, https://crest.com/en-us/oral-care-products/toothpaste.
::::

:::: {#rf-013 .note}
::: title
:::

13\.

Niyathi Rao, "The Pareto Principle (80:20 Rule) for Customer Success,"

Customer Success Intelligence

(blog), SmartKarrot, March 17, 2021,
https://www.smartkarrot.com/resources/blog/pareto-principle-80-20-rule-customer-success/.
::::

:::: {#rf-014 .note}
::: title
:::

14\.

"Buy Back & Resell," IKEA, accessed November 30, 2021,
https://www.ikea.com/us/en/customer-service/services/buyback-pubfeb6cc00.
::::

:::: {#rf-015 .note}
::: title
:::

15\.

Lululemon Like New (website), Lululemon Athletica, accessed June 24,
2022, https://likenew.lululemon.com/.
::::

:::: {#rf-016 .note}
::: title
:::

16\.

Hitesh Bhasin, "Vals: Values Attitude Lifestyle," Marketing91, January
30, 2020, https://www.marketing91.com/vals-values-attitude-lifestyle/.
::::

:::: {#rf-017 .note}
::: title
:::

17\.

Ibid.
::::

# 

behavioral segmentation

method of grouping customers by their behavior patterns or interactions
with a brand

demographic segmentation

grouping customers and potential customers together by focusing on
certain traits such as age, gender, income, occupation, and family
status

geographic segmentation

marketing strategy used to target products or services at people who
live in or shop at a particular location

market segmentation

the process of dividing a broad consumer or business market into
subgroups based on shared characteristics

multi-segment marketing

marketing strategy in which the firm targets several different market
segments simultaneously

psychographic segmentation

dividing consumers into subgroups based on shared psychological
characteristics, including beliefs, motivations, and priorities
