m00028

98013801-8b4a-422d-8d8e-823bd2179e46

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Describe the challenges of segmenting B2B markets.

Discuss the advantages of segmenting B2B markets.

Explain methods of segmenting B2B markets.

# Challenges of Segmenting B2B Markets {#sect-00002}

Just like its consumer market counterpart, business-to-business (B2B)
market segmentation focuses on identifying unique market segments based
on common characteristics. However, segmenting a B2B market is in many
ways far more challenging than segmenting a consumer market because the
motivations, processes, and considerations of B2B buyers are quite
different from those of business-to-consumer (B2C) buyers. Let's take a
closer look.

Challenge #1: Dealing with Highly Complex B2B Markets.

As discussed in

Business Markets and Purchasing Behavior

, decision-making in B2B markets is quite different from decision-making
in B2C markets. In a B2C market, the consumer is often the only decision
maker involved in making a purchase. That's not the case in B2B markets,
where you're often dealing with a buying center---all the people in the
organization who have varying influence on the B2B buy decision. You may
also recall from this chapter that buying centers have a variety of
members who play different roles, such as users, initiators,
influencers, gatekeepers, decision-makers, etc. Accordingly, it can be
difficult to identify precisely who the target buyer is.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Challenge #2: Dealing with More Rational Buyers.

Although the view is somewhat controversial, it is said that B2B buyers
are more "rational." Consumers tend to buy what they want and are more
affected by emotions in buying decisions. Alternatively, B2B buyers
typically buy what they need, and buying decisions are more deliberate,
particularly in terms of price. Accordingly, in B2B markets, the
marketer must determine the drivers of those needs.

Challenge #3: Complexity of B2B Products.

Just as the decision-making unit in a B2B transaction is more complex,
so too are the B2B products themselves. When you make a major purchase,
like a high-definition TV, your choice is likely made on the basis of
fairly simple criteria. You might evaluate things like screen size,
resolution, and your budget. However, in the B2B market, even the
simplest of products may have to be integrated into a larger system. For
example, a new payroll system might have to be integrated into the
company's human resources information system (HRIS). Another
consideration with respect to the complexity of B2B products is that
many B2B purchases are frequently tweaked to meet the company's detailed
specifications, whereas consumer products are almost always
standardized.

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

# Advantages of Segmenting B2B Markets {#sect-00003}

Market segmentation is a tried-and-true method that's been around since
the 1950s, but there is still some confusion about how to use it in a
B2B setting because it's not as clear-cut as other forms of market
segmentation. How does a marketer target the characteristics of
something impersonal like a business? Despite the challenges of
segmenting B2B markets, it still plays a critical role. Let's examine
some of the advantages.

Improved Campaign Performance

. Similar to the previous example of a company using specialty magazines
to reach the right target audience with the right message, B2B marketers
can do the same. For example,

Mailchimp

, a marketing automation platform and email marketing service, examined
user data to compare segmented marketing campaigns with non-segmented
campaigns. The statistics based upon a comparison of 18 million email
recipients were eye-opening. Campaigns directed toward defined market
segments saw increases in a number of areas, including a 14.3 percent
higher email open rate.

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Improved Customer Loyalty and Retention

. In our discussion of consumer market segmentation, we pointed out that
market segmentation allows marketers to better understand what consumers
are looking for in a product or service, and the same holds true with
B2B market segmentation. The more marketers know about their customers'
business objectives and challenges, the more they can attempt to meet
their needs. That not only builds confidence in the brand but also
ultimately leads to greater customer retention and loyalty.

:::: {#note-00005 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Assistance in Product Development

. By using market segmentation, a company can refine its products or
services to better meet the needs of its B2B customers. For example,
let's say your company's product is payroll software. Having better
identified the needs of the target market, your company may be able to
add new features and functionality to make it even more attractive for
the target market and possibly add a new revenue stream by making the
product useful for another market segment.

Improved Profitability

. Implementing a market segmentation strategy accomplishes three
important goals. First, targeting the right B2B customers with the right
message increases your company's competitiveness. Second, it enables the
marketer to properly price products with the best price for its
different customer segments. Third, it helps identify the best prices
with which to target new customers and ensure that your organization's
offerings are neither overpriced nor underpriced, thereby increasing
profitability.

:::: {#note-00006 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

# Methods of Segmenting B2B Markets {#sect-00004}

How do you segment B2B markets? Just like with consumer markets, there
is a variety of methods. Marketers can segment B2B markets based on
firmographics, technographics, needs-based segmentation, value-based
segmentation, and behavioral segmentation (see [\#](#)). We will look at
each of these in the following sections.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

## Firmographics {#sect-00005}

Where demographics are concerned with people, firmographics are
concerned with companies. They are a grouping of B2B customers based on
shared company attributes. There are five general categories of
firmographics:

Industry.

What are the organization's primary activities? Once you've determined
that piece of information, you can use market segmentation to group
firms that are in a similar line of business.

Location.

The mantra in the real estate industry is that there are three things
that matter: location, location, location. Just like with geographic
segmentation in the B2C market, a marketer can choose a city, state,
country or even a continent, depending on the line of business. For
instance, depending on the cybersecurity challenges or threats faced by
customers in different countries or regions, a cybersecurity firm may
offer different cybersafety features in its software.

:::: {#note-00007 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Size.

Will your company target small and midsize operations or Fortune 500
companies? The needs of these organizations are vastly different.
Firmographic size typically involves two components: revenue and number
of employees.

Legal Structure.

In firmographics, legal structure denotes the legal status of a firm.
For example, is the organization a sole proprietorship, a limited
liability company, a corporation, or a nonprofit firm? Is it an
independent business, a parent company, or a subsidiary of another
business?

:::: {#note-00008 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

All of these factors are important to know in order to create targeted
content.

Performance.

Customer segments can be broken down based on performance, such as
market share, quarterly or annual sales figures, and growth and/or
losses (both in employees and revenue).

## Segmenting Customers Based on Technographics {#sect-00006}

Technographic segmentation is based on the various hardware and software
technologies used by B2B customers. It allows the marketer to organize
prospects by their technology ownership and usage and narrow the market
to those prospects who want to invest in new technological solution in
the future.

## Needs-Based Segmentation {#sect-00007}

Think about it: What's the point of marketing a product or a service to
an organization that doesn't need it? Needs-based segmentation is the
concept that a marketer should focus limited resources on those
customers that need the product and have the ability to purchase it.

Needs-based segmentation clusters groups of customers on the basis of
what they need or want when seeking a product. Does your company's
product offer the features or benefits that the B2B buyer is seeking?
Will the product meet the buyer's (or company's) needs? Those are the
questions marketers need to answer when segmenting the B2B market based
on needs. The late Theodore Levitt, an economist and a professor at
Harvard Business School once said, "People don't want to buy a
quarter-inch drill; they want a quarter-inch hole." Accordingly, rather
than segmenting a market based on firmographics, many marketers choose
to segment it based on what is valued by decision influencers.

## Value-Based Segmentation {#sect-00008}

Value-based segmentation (sometimes called tiering or profitability
segmentation) groups customers according to the potential value they may
bring to a business. It places potential customers with the same value
level (or "transactional worth") into individual segments for target
marketing. In its simplest terms, this approach is like the usage-based
segmentation strategy of B2C markets. A marketer examines previous
purchase data to determine how much a company buys, how frequently it
buys, and the value of the purchases.

## Behavioral Segmentation {#sect-00009}

Behavioral segmentation considers the behavior of customers toward a
company's products or services. We're not talking about two-way mirrors
or covert operations here. This can be as simple as determining how the
customer interacted with your company's website, what content they
interacted with, and whether the customer opened your last marketing
email. The marketer then segments customers on the basis of their
interaction with the company and attempts to discern if customers within
that segment have become more interested or less interested over time.
Behavioral segmentation is often used together with value-based
segmentation to identify which customers should be pursued to get
greater value out of them.

:::: {#note-00013 .note}
::: title
The Importance of Segmentation
:::

For more information on the importance of segmenting B2B customers,
check out this video, The Importance of Segmenting Your Customers. This
video is from B2B Business International Market Research, a market
research company, and it speaks to the importance and value of knowing
your customers.

[The Importance of Segmenting Your Customers](#)
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00010}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00011}

:::: {#rf-018 .note}
::: title
:::

18\.

"Market Segmentation Strategies: 3 Major Challenges B2B Enterprises Face
and Ways to Tackle Them," Thoughts, Infiniti Research, December 12,
2018,
https://www.infinitiresearch.com/thoughts/challenges-b2b-market-segmentation/.
::::

:::: {#rf-019 .note}
::: title
:::

19\.

Paul Hague and Matthew Harrison, "Market Segmentation in B2B Markets,"
B2B International, last modified June 22, 2022,
https://www.b2binternational.com/publications/b2b-segmentation-research/.
::::

:::: {#rf-020 .note}
::: title
:::

20\.

"How Organizations Can Benefit from B2B Market Segmentation,"

B2B Global Zone

(blog), Kompass International, May 4, 2021,
https://www.solutions.kompass.com/blog/how-organizations-can-benefit-from-b2b-market-segmentation/.
::::

:::: {#rf-021 .note}
::: title
:::

21\.

Kit Smith, "The Complete Guide to B2B Market Segmentation," Sopro, April
20, 2021,
https://sopro.io/added-value/blog/b2b-market-segmentation-guide/.
::::

:::: {#rf-022 .note}
::: title
:::

22\.

Rohit Roy, "How to Do Market Segmentation: 5 Most Effective Types of B2B
Market Segmentation Strategies," Clodura, May 13, 2020,
https://clodura.ai/blog/how-to-do-market-segmentation-5-most-effective-types-of-b2b-market-segmentation-strategies/.
::::

:::: {#rf-023 .note}
::: title
:::

23\.

Emily Pribanic, "Benefits of Market Segmentation for Business," MarTech,
TechFunnel, updated January 6, 2020,
https://www.techfunnel.com/martech/benefits-of-market-segmentation-for-business/.
::::

:::: {#rf-024 .note}
::: title
:::

24\.

Roy, "Market Segmentation."
::::

:::: {#rf-025 .note}
::: title
:::

25\.

Roy, "Market Segmentation."
::::

:::: {#rf-026 .note}
::: title
:::

26\.

Roy, "Market Segmentation."
::::

:::: {#rf-027 .note}
::: title
:::

27\.

Mark Eardley, "B2B Customer Centricity: Why It's Vital for Needs-Based
Segmentation," MarkLives.com, June 19, 2018,
https://www.marklives.com/2018/06/b2b-customer-centricity-why-its-vital-for-needs-based-segmentation/.
::::

:::: {#rf-028 .note}
::: title
:::

28\.

Roy, "Market Segmentation."
::::

:::: {#rf-029 .note}
::: title
:::

29\.

Roy, "Market Segmentation."
::::

# 

firmographics

a grouping of B2B customers based on shared company attributes; includes
five categories: industry, location, size, legal structure, and
performance

needs-based segmentation

dividing the market up into smaller groups of people who have
approximately the same needs

technographic segmentation

organizing B2B prospects by their technology ownership and usage

value-based segmentation

evaluating groups of customers in terms of the revenue they generate and
the costs of establishing and maintaining relationships with them
