m00029

5664e765-ff26-4188-9d2f-c8b133cec214

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Describe the challenges of segmenting international markets.

Discuss the advantages of segmenting international markets.

Explain methods of segmenting international markets.

# Challenges of Segmenting International Markets {#sect-00002}

As we've outlined in this chapter, companies can't be all things to all
people because buyers differ in terms of their needs, wants, and
demands. Accordingly, just as with consumer markets and B2B markets,
companies typically find it necessary to segment international markets.

That's not to say that segmenting international markets is easy; rather,
the reverse is true: it adds a whole new set of complications, including
differences in cultural, economic, and political environments in various
countries. Additionally, because of those cultural, economic, and
political differences, consumers in international markets tend to be
more diverse in character than domestic markets. Moreover, the range of
income levels and populations and the diversity of lifestyles in
international markets tend to be significantly greater than in the
domestic market. Accordingly, a single marketing strategy for all
segments is questionable at best.

# Advantages of Segmenting International Markets {#sect-00003}

The advantages of segmenting international markets aren't all that
different from the advantages of segmenting the consumer or B2B markets,
but there are some subtle differences. A marketer in the United States
may have a much easier time understanding the needs and wants of US
consumers, but that may not be the case with international consumers.
Segmenting the international market and conducting market research
allows the marketer to have a better understanding of international
customers. It also enables the marketer to identify similarities and
differences across international markets, which may lead them to combine
segments across countries or even regions.

# Methods of Segmenting International Markets {#sect-00004}

There are four primary methods of segmenting international markets, as
shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

## Geographic Segmentation {#sect-00005}

Just as with domestic markets, international markets can be segmented
geographically. A company might segment by regions, such as Western
Europe, the Middle East, Africa, Latin America, etc. Keep in mind,
however, that although geographic segmentation groups countries by
location, they may be very different from one another in other respects.
For example, if you were to consider the countries included in a Western
European region, you'd find that, both culturally and economically, the
United Kingdom and Scotland are very similar, but both differ
significantly from neighboring Ireland. Similarly, people in West Africa
tend to share similarities in dress, cuisine, and music, but these
characteristics aren't shared extensively with groups outside of West
Africa.

In terms of geographic segmentation, marketers also need to consider the
infrastructure of the country---the basic physical systems of the
nation, such as roads, sewage treatment, communication, water treatment,
electricity, etc. You may have the best product for the consumers in the
international market segment, but if the infrastructure is such that you
can't reasonably get the products to the consumers, that represents a
restraining force that limits the opportunity.

Although the project is controversial, China has invested billions of
dollars in an effort to strengthen its economy and global trade through
its Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), a vast network of railways, energy
pipelines, and highways through six economic corridors, both westward
through former Soviet republics and southward to Pakistan, India, and
Southeast Asia. In order to expand maritime trade traffic, China is
investing in port development along the Indian Ocean, from Southeast
Asia to East Africa and parts of Europe. The BRI spans a multitude of
infrastructure projects intended to promote the flow of goods and
foreign investment and is expected to impact more than 80 countries.

## Segmentation Based on Political and Legal Factors {#sect-00006}

As you've seen from our discussion of segmenting consumer markets, it's
often done on the basis of factors such as age, gender, product usage,
personality, etc. That's true as well in international markets, but the
marketer needs to add still another dimension: country characteristics.
These characteristics are typically political and legal factors, such as
the type and stability of the government, how receptive the government
is to foreign firms, monetary regulations, and how complex the
bureaucracy of the nation is. There are numerous other governmental
policies that can interfere with international trade, such as tariffs
(taxes imposed on imports), import quotas, currency controls, and local
content requirements.

In 2022, in response to Russia's invasion of Ukraine, major sanctions
have been put in place against Russia by the United States, the European
Union, and the United Kingdom. For example, the United Kingdom imposed a
35 percent tax on some Russian imports, and several international
companies like McDonald's, Coca-Cola, Starbucks and Marks & Spencer have
either suspended operations in Russia or have withdrawn altogether. It
doesn't take much to imagine the financial impact on Russia as a result
of these sanctions.

## Segmentation Based on Economic Factors {#sect-00007}

Still another way to segment markets internationally is on the basis of
economic factors---the level of economic development and the income
levels of the population. This is often differentiated on the basis of
whether the country is developing, developed, or underdeveloped. This
classification is based on the nation's economic status (i.e., gross
domestic product, gross national product, per capita income, degree of
industrialization, and standard of living).

Developed countries typically have a high rate of industrialization and
a relatively high level of individual income. Unemployment and poverty
are typically low in developed nations, and citizens enjoy a relatively
high standard of living, along with higher life expectancy. It's likely
in developed nations that companies will focus their international
marketing efforts. According to the United Nations in 2020, 36 countries
were classified as developed; interestingly enough, all of these
countries were located in either North America, Europe, or "Developed
Asia and Pacific."

Developing countries, on the other hand, have a lower standard of
living, a lower per capita income, and a slow rate of industrialization.
Unemployment and poverty tend to be relatively high compared to
developed countries, as are infant mortality rates. The United Nations
categorized 126 countries as developing, and all of these were located
in either Africa, Asia, Latin America or the Caribbean.

Underdeveloped countries are less developed economically than most other
nations. These countries typically have little industry, and the
standard of living is considerably lower than in developed or developing
countries. Infrastructure may also be compromised in terms of roads,
sewage treatment, water quality, etc. As a general rule, although there
may be an attractive market for your company's product or service in an
underdeveloped country, the challenges of getting the product into the
customer's hands are often difficult to overcome.

## Segmentation Based on Cultural Factors {#sect-00008}

Cultural factors, such as common language, religions, values, and
attitudes, can also be used to segment a country or region. McDonald's
uses a "think global, act local" strategy to help meet the cultural
needs of various market segments. On one hand, it offers a standardized
menu of offerings worldwide, like McNuggets and the McFlurry. On the
other hand, it customizes other offerings on its menu to adapt to the
cultural requirements of consumers. For example, in India, in order to
appeal to vegetarian and non-beef-eating customers, McDonald's
introduced the Maharaja Mac, which is made with a corn and cheese patty.
The company also used the term "Maharaja" to appeal to India's history
and liking of royalty and called it the "Social Burger" to suggest that
it can be eaten quickly, giving people more time to spend with friends.

McDonald's not only customizes its menu based on where it operates, but
it also customizes its digital and TV advertisements depending on each
country and consumer segment. For example, in Singapore, McDonald's ads
attempted to appeal to consumers' love of nightlife by showing how
McDonald's can enhance a night out, whereas in the United Kingdom, the
company created cartoon ads focusing on Happy Meals to attract the large
segment of children in the UK.

Not to be outdone by McDonald's, Burger King also offers a wide variety
of international menu items that aren't available in the United States.
Did you know that there's a Spicy Shrimp Whopper available in Japan and
a SufganiKing (Donut Burger) in Israel? In Norway, where there is one
sauna for every two people, Burger King opened a fully operational spa
complete with a 15-person sauna and media lounge where customers can
enjoy their meals.

One model that is particularly useful in assessing culture is social
psychologist Geert Hofstede's cultural dimensions, originally published
in the 1970s. Hofstede had studied IBM employees in over 50 countries
and identified five dimensions that could be used to distinguish one
culture from another. Four of these dimensions directly affect marketing
in different cultures:

Power Distance Index (PDI).

This dimension refers to how much power inequality exists within a
culture and the degree to which people are accepting of this inequality.
A high PDI score suggests that society accepts an unequal distribution
of power, whereas a low PDI score means that power is shared and widely
dispersed. If you're curious, the United States has a moderately low PDI
score of 40 on a scale of 1 to 100, compared to a world average of 55.

:::: {#note-00016 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

This means that the United States is less accepting of hierarchy and
authority than nations such as Malaysia, which has the highest power
distance index in the world.

:::: {#note-00017 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

This cultural dimension plays an important role in marketing because, in
countries where there is a high power distance index, marketers need to
appeal to the leadership or the head of the family, whereas in low power
distance index countries, it's more important to reach a broad range of
"ordinary" people who will be the ultimate decision makers.

Individualism versus Collectivism (IDV).

This dimension refers to whether the culture emphasizes the needs and
goals of the group as a whole or whether individual needs are paramount.

:::: {#note-00018 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Think of individualism and collectivism as an "I" versus a "we"
orientation. An individualistic society places emphasis on attaining
personal goals, whereas a collectivist culture places emphasis on group
goals and the well-being of the group. The United States has a very high
individualism score of 91, compared to many Latin American countries
such as Ecuador and Guatemala, which have single-digit individualism
scores.

:::: {#note-00019 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

The implications for marketing are important here because for countries
with high individualism, the marketing messages should emphasize how
your products or services benefit them individually, such as by saving
time and rewarding themselves. On the other hand, in countries with a
low individualism ranking, it's more important to stress how buying your
company's products will benefit the community as a whole.

Uncertainty Avoidance (UAI).

This dimension refers to the degree to which a society avoids risk or
ambiguity. Societies with a high degree of uncertainty avoidance
compensate for this uncertainty by establishing rules, policies, and
procedures, whereas societies with low uncertainty avoidance more
readily accept change. The UAI for the United States is 46, putting it
into the moderate range compared to European nations like Italy (UAI of
75) and Poland (UAI of 93).

:::: {#note-00020 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Let's consider how this affects marketing. Cultures with high
uncertainty avoidance generally prefer to have product characteristics
clearly spelled out, complete with product warranties and money-back
guarantees. For example, if you want to market automobiles in that type
of culture, it would be important to focus on the safety features of the
car. Conversely, cultures with low uncertainty avoidance are more
accepting of trying something new.

Masculinity/Femininity (MAS).

This dimension refers to the degree to which gender-specific roles are
valued in the society: Are "masculine" values such as achievement,
ambition, and acquisition or "feminine" values such as quality of life
and service to others valued more? In countries with a high masculinity
ranking (e.g., Japan), men are intended to lead; women are supposed to
follow. This is in direct contrast to countries with a low masculinity
ranking (such as the United States and Canada), where women are treated
equally to men and gender roles are more fluid. Societies with low
masculinity would tend to respond negatively to gender-oriented
promotion, so a neutral approach that appeals to both men and women
would be more appropriate.

:::: {#note-00021 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Consider how many brands in the United States focus on female
empowerment and positive body image. That type of advertising would not
appeal to a society with a masculine orientation.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00009}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00010}

:::: {#rf-030 .note}
::: title
:::

30\.

Yoram (Jerry) Wind and David R. Bell, "Market Segmentation," in

The Marketing Book

, ed. Michael J. Baker and Susan J. Hart, 6th ed. (Burlington, MA:
Butterworth-Heinemann, 2008), 222--244, from
https://faculty.wharton.upenn.edu/wp-content/uploads/2012/04/0702_Market_Segmentation.pdf.
::::

:::: {#rf-031 .note}
::: title
:::

31\.

Wind and Bell, "Market Segmentation."
::::

:::: {#rf-032 .note}
::: title
:::

32\.

Kenneth Fillmore, "Segmenting International Markets,"

ZABANGA Marketing

(blog), updated June 4, 2022,
https://www.zabanga.us/customer-relationships/segmenting-international-markets.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-033 .note}
::: title
:::

33\.

Frank Jerry, reply to "How are the various African countries different
from each other? What makes each of them unique?," Quora, April 25,
2014,
https://www.quora.com/How-are-the-various-African-countries-different-from-each-other-What-makes-each-of-them-unique.
::::

:::: {#rf-034 .note}
::: title
:::

34\.

Sonal Varma, Euben Paracuelles, and Craig Chan, "The Belt and Road
Initiative: Globalization, China Style," Nomura Connects, Nomura
Holdings, April 2018,
https://www.nomuraconnects.com/focused-thinking-posts/the-belt-and-road-initiative-globalisation-china-style/.
::::

:::: {#rf-035 .note}
::: title
:::

35\.

"International Market Segmentation, Selection and Positioning,"
International Marketing, Hahu Zone, accessed June 24, 2022,
https://hahuzone.com/international-market-segmentation-selection-and-positioning.
::::

:::: {#rf-036 .note}
::: title
:::

36\.

"What Are the Sanctions on Russia and Are They Hurting Its Economy?,"
BBC News, BBC, June 27, 2022,
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-60125659.
::::

:::: {#rf-037 .note}
::: title
:::

37\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-038 .note}
::: title
:::

38\.

"Top 25 Developed and Developing Countries," Investopedia, Dotdash
Meredith, updated May 27, 2022,
https://www.investopedia.com/updates/top-developing-countries/.
::::

:::: {#rf-039 .note}
::: title
:::

39\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-040 .note}
::: title
:::

40\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-041 .note}
::: title
:::

41\.

Arianna and Virginia, "McDonald's International Market Communications
Strategy," Global Marketing Professor, May 3, 2021,
https://globalmarketingprofessor.com/mcdonalds-international-market-communications-strategy/.
::::

:::: {#rf-042 .note}
::: title
:::

42\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-043 .note}
::: title
:::

43\.

Ian Burke, "From a 7-Patty Whopper to Burgers with Black Buns, Here Are
13 of the Wildest International Burger King Menu Items," Insider, August
18, 2019,
https://www.insider.com/13-wild-burger-king-promotional-menu-items-not-in-us-2019-6.
::::

:::: {#rf-044 .note}
::: title
:::

44\.

"Hofstede's Cultural Dimensions: Understanding Different Countries,"
Career Skills, Mind Tools, accessed June 24, 2022,
https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/newLDR_66.htm.
::::

:::: {#rf-045 .note}
::: title
:::

45\.

"United States of America Business Etiquette, Culture, & Manners,"
International Business Etiquette and Manners for Global Travelers,
International Business Center, accessed June 24, 2022,
https://www.cyborlink.com/besite/us.htm.
::::

:::: {#rf-046 .note}
::: title
:::

46\.

Kate Sweetman, "In Asia, Power Gets in the Way,"

Harvard Business Review

, April 10, 2012, https://hbr.org/2012/04/in-asia-power-gets-in-the-way.
::::

:::: {#rf-047 .note}
::: title
:::

47\.

Kendra Cherry, "What Is a Collectivist Culture? Individualism vs.
Collectivism," Verywell Mind, Dotdash Meredith, February 23, 2022,
https://www.verywellmind.com/what-are-collectivistic-cultures-2794962.
::::

:::: {#rf-048 .note}
::: title
:::

48\.

"Individualism," Geert Hofstede Cultural Dimensions, Clearly Cultural,
accessed June 24, 2022,
https://clearlycultural.com/geert-hofstede-cultural-dimensions/individualism/.
::::

:::: {#rf-049 .note}
::: title
:::

49\.

Mind Tools, "Hofstede's Cultural Dimensions."
::::

:::: {#rf-050 .note}
::: title
:::

50\.

Bert Markgraf, "How to Apply Hofstede's Classification Scheme in a
Global Marketing Context," Small Business, Chron.com, last modified
October 26, 2016,
https://smallbusiness.chron.com/apply-hofstedes-classification-scheme-global-marketing-context-75008.html.
::::
