m00030

b8b727af-e728-488b-bdbe-05b2d0905e40

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

List and describe the essential factors in effective market
segmentation.

# Essential Factors in Effective Market Segmentation {#sect-00002}

There's an acronym you can remember for the essential factors in
effective and successful market segmentation---ADAMS. The acronym stands
for five criteria:

A

ccessible

D

ifferentiable

A

ctionable

M

easurable

S

ubstantial

First, a market segment should be accessible. Can you reach consumers in
that segment at an affordable cost, given the strengths and abilities of
your marketing department? For example, if you discover that certain
segments respond more effectively to outdoor advertising, social media
campaigns, TV infomercials, or print ads, does your organization have
the capabilities (and budget) to reach that segment?

Second, a market segment should be differentiable. In an ideal world, a
market segment should be internally homogeneous (i.e., consumers within
that segment have similar preferences and characteristics) but
externally heterogeneous (i.e., different segments should be quite
distinct and different from each other). You have to clearly define the
differences between market segments so that the marketing programs
directed at them can be implemented without overlap.

Third, a market segment should be actionable. Is it practical (or
profitable) to execute a marketing strategy aimed at that segment? A
market segment should be able to respond to a certain marketing strategy
and have outcomes---e.g., awareness, interest, or purchase---that can be
easily quantified.

Fourth, a market segment should be measurable. You should be able to
accurately estimate the size of the market segment in terms of either
sales value or number of customers so that you can decide whether, how,
and to what extent you should focus your efforts on that segment.

Finally, a market segment should be substantial. It doesn't make sense
to waste resources to market the product or service to a group too small
to justify the expenditure of resources.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00003}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00004}

:::: {#rf-051 .note}
::: title
:::

51\.

"5 Requirements for Effective Segmentation,"

Commence CRM Blog

, Commence, February 18, 2021,
https://commence.com/blog/2021/02/18/requirements-for-segmentation/.
::::

# 

ADAMS

the essential factors in effective market segmentation---accessible,
differentiable, actionable, measurable, and substantial
