m00031

15fa5b05-59d7-4912-ba2a-3918b7850281

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define target market.

Explain target market strategies.

# Target Markets Defined {#sect-00002}

Ultimately, the purpose of segmenting a market is to highlight the
differences between groups of customers so that you can decide on which
group(s) to focus your marketing efforts and resources---that's your
target market ([\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Think of your target market in terms of focusing your marketing
resources on segments that are more likely to buy from you. The bottom
line is that target marketing is a more efficient, effective, and
affordable way to reach customers and generate business. It's simply a
subset of the total market.

Keep in mind that the target market isn't the same as the target
audience. The target audience is narrower in that it refers to the group
of consumers you expect to actually purchase the product. The audience
may or may not overlap with the target market. For example, a children's
toy may have a target market of boys between the ages of 6 and 12, but
it's the boys' parents (who actually purchase the toy) who are the
target audience. Let's take a look at how LEGO has mastered this
concept.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
LEGO
:::

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

You might think that children are the primary target market of toy
manufacturers, but smart toy marketers know that they also have to
market to parents because it's parents who actually buy the toys for
their children. The marketers at LEGO (see [\#](#)) seemed to have
figured this out and have made the brand parent-approved by combining
fun for children with an educational "twist."

LEGO brands its products not only as a creative outlet for children but
also an opportunity to grow their interest in STEAM---a learning
approach that incorporates science, technology, engineering, the arts,
and mathematics. For example, [one of its websites](#) features
education sets for children from preschool through middle school that
promote learning through the toys. [Another of its websites](#) has an
entire section of tips for playful parenting with LEGO bricks. It also
has websites for daily LEGO challenges and even daily build challenges
and LEGO lessons for families at home.

Parents today want to buy their children toys that are safe and fun and
that help them learn, and LEGO seems to have been able to win over the
hearts (and money) of its target audience.

For more information about LEGO and STEAM, watch this video from Kansas
City PBS.

[Block by block: LEGO robotics builds interest in STEM](#)
::::

Another important concept in target marketing is what's known as a buyer
persona. A buyer persona is a semi-fictional representation of an ideal
customer that helps marketers understand and relate to the target
market. Buyer personas are intended to help marketers "visualize" those
to whom they are selling so they can fine-tune their marketing messages.

Best Buy used personas in precisely this way. Its buyer personas are
"Buzz" (the young tech enthusiast), "Barry" (the wealthy professional),
"Ray" (the family man), and "Jill" (a soccer mom who is the main shopper
for the household but usually avoids electronics stores).

What's typically included in the buyer persona? Some examples include
the following:

Name.

It may seem silly to include a made-up persona name like Best Buy did,
but it's done so that the marketing team can more easily discuss their
customers and plan how to reach them.

Age.

The age (or age range) of a persona allows for understanding
generation-specific characteristics. As we pointed out in our earlier
discussion of using age as a way to segment the market, consumers within
the same age group tend to share characteristics and purchase
preferences.

Interests.

The interests of the buyer persona describe things like hobbies or what
they do in their spare time.

Media Usage.

What media platforms does the buyer persona use? Television, radio, the
Internet? This is important because the marketer wants to know where to
reach these "people" with their marketing messages.

Finances.

The income and other financial characteristics of the buyer personas
help marketers glean insights as to what types of products or services
will pique the interests of these buyer personas. These financial
characteristics also assist in making decisions about price points and
promotions that would be successful in reaching these customers.

Brand Affinities.

Do they like certain brands? If so, this can provide the marketer with
valuable information about the type of content to which they best
respond.

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

:::: {#note-00005 .note}
::: title
Importance of Buyer Personas
:::

Customer personas are a tool to help marketers better understand their
potential customers. Learn what a customer persona is and how to develop
them from this brief Go Daddy video.

[How to Create a Customer Persona to Understand Your Ideal Client](#)

Also, check out this video from HubSpot's Stephen Higgins on how to use
buyer personas to drive your marketing strategy.

[HubSpot\'s Stephen Higgins Explains Buyer Personas](#)
::::

# Target Market Strategies {#sect-00003}

Thus far, we've discussed the how of segmenting a market and selecting
target markets. At this point, it's up to the marketer whether the
company will focus its efforts and resources on one or more of the
identified segments or instead cater to the mass market. That choice is
the determining factor in the company's marketing mix and its
positioning plank. There are four generic target marketing strategies,
as illustrated in [\#](#).

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

Let's look at each of these strategies more closely.

## Undifferentiated Marketing (Mass Marketing) {#sect-00004}

Sometimes there are no strong distinctions in customer characteristics.
In cases like this, the costs involved in developing separate marketing
mixes for separate target markets doesn't make financial sense. That's
when a company may decide to use a single marketing mix for the entire
market.

Let's imagine the entire market as one big apple pie. With
undifferentiated marketing, the company doesn't take just one slice or
perhaps a few slices of the pie---it takes the whole thing. The concept
of undifferentiated marketing is quite simple. You want to reach as many
people as possible and hope they'll jump on board with your product or
service. Mass marketing is typically used when a brand has a product or
service that has high market appeal, such as things that most (or maybe
even all) people will always need or want. Consider a product that
nearly everyone purchases, like soft drinks. Now think about all the
advertising messages you get for a brand like Coca-Cola---you'll see TV
commercials, magazine ads, billboards, banner ads in search engines, and
the list goes on. That's the hallmark of mass marketing.

One of the biggest advantages of undifferentiated marketing is the scope
and cost-efficiency of advertising on a much larger scale. Every single
marketing message can be deployed across a variety of media channels and
can potentially reach millions of consumers. This is where economies of
scale come into play: with high-volume sales, production becomes less
expensive because costs can be spread out over a larger amount of goods.
That's a huge advantage compared to companies that produce products for
smaller, more precisely targeted audiences. It's like buying in bulk at
Sam's Club or Costco---because you buy so much of a product, the cost is
lower. Companies that use undifferentiated marketing experience the same
thing.

## Differentiated Marketing (Segmented Marketing) {#sect-00005}

Now let's take that same apple pie (the entire market), but instead of
taking the whole thing, we're going to take only some of it. Perhaps
we'll take just a few slices, or maybe we'll take more. It depends on
how many target markets you want to serve. That's the premise of
differentiated marketing.

This type of market targeting is one of the most common. A company
identifies several target markets and designs separate, concentrated
strategies for each. Separate brands are developed to serve each of the
segments. Consider Nike, for example, which (like most apparel
companies) offers different products for different segments. When Nike
began its business, the founders were both competitive distance runners,
so they targeted people like themselves as a segment of the running shoe
market and the brand took off. However, in order to grow the business,
Nike now focuses on three segments---women, young athletes, and runners.

The automobile market is another good example of a clearly segmented
market. Look around you on any given day, and you'll clearly see that
people want different types of vehicles---small cars, big cars, SUVs,
trucks, hybrids, and luxury cars. Many of the car makers like GM, Ford,
Toyota, Honda, and others generally offer cars for most or all of the
segments. For example, Honda\'s lineup includes models like the CR-V
compact SUV, the Civic compact car, the midsize Honda Accord sedan,
larger SUVs, and even a minivan.

## Concentrated Marketing (Niche Marketing) {#sect-00006}

Now we're going to take that same apple pie (remember, representing the
entire market), and we're only going to take a single slice, and perhaps
a small one at that. That's concentrated marketing.

Concentrated marketing doesn't mean that the company hasn't identified
other target markets; it simply means that it chooses not to serve all
of them. Some markets may not be attractive; other markets may not align
with the company's business strengths. Therefore, the company focuses on
just one target market with a single marketing mix. It channels all of
its marketing efforts toward that specific segment with the aim of
"owning" it over its competitors and creating strong brand loyalty.

A good example of concentrated marketing is the eco-friendly cosmetics
retailer LUSH. LUSH advocates for ethical buying and purity of handmade
products and doesn't use animals in testing its products. As a matter of
fact, at least half of its website is dedicated to fighting animal
testing and overuse of plastic packaging and creating environmental
awareness. The company also differentiates itself from its competitors
with eco-friendly packaging and organic ingredients.

This is a smart strategy for smaller companies or companies with limited
resources that might be stretched thin if they attempt to compete in too
many market segments. It has the added benefit that R&D and marketing
can concentrate on understanding and meeting the needs of one group of
customers rather than a diverse base of customers.

## Micromarketing (Customized Marketing) {#sect-00007}

Micromarketing goes one step further than concentrated marketing and
targets a specific group of individuals within a niche market based on
specific information that has been collected about them.

For a good example of micromarketing, consider the real estate industry.
A realtor may specialize in commercial sales or residential sales.
Within the scope of residential sales, that realtor may drill down
further and specialize in new construction, luxury properties, land and
development, over-55 communities, or farms/ranches/equestrian
properties.

Now let's assume that you're in the market for an expensive home in a
particular area of the city. You'd likely contact a realtor who has
developed a reputation in dealing with properties in a specific price
range and knows the area where you'd like to move. That realtor is going
to consider your specific needs and demands and will invest their
efforts in finding a property that meets as many of your requirements as
possible. That's micromarketing.

Stitch Fix is another good example of a company that uses
micromarketing. Stitch Fix is an online personal styling service for
men, women, and children that sends a selection of clothing and
accessories to your door using a mix of machine learning, data,
algorithms, and human stylists. The company uses "85 meaningful data
points" about each customer, and based on those data points, it predicts
clothing choices that the customer will want. If they doesn't like the
product, they can just send it back with a prepaid, printable label
within 30 days. You can't get much more personalized than that!

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00008}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00009}

:::: {#rf-052 .note}
::: title
:::

52\.

Amanda Dodge, "How Lego Keeps Winning Fans Wherever It Goes,"

ReferralCandy Blog

, ReferralCandy, February 9, 2017,
https://www.referralcandy.com/blog/lego-marketing-strategy/.
::::

:::: {#rf-053 .note}
::: title
:::

53\.

Anne Gentle, "Best Buy's Personas Hit the Mainstream," JustWriteClick,
September 29, 2005,
https://justwriteclick.com/2005/09/29/best-buys-personas-hit-the-mainstream/.
::::

:::: {#rf-054 .note}
::: title
:::

54\.

"Examples of Buyer Personas for Any Business," Marketo Engage, Adobe,
January 21, 2021,
https://www.marketo.com/articles/buyer-persona-examples/.
::::

:::: {#rf-055 .note}
::: title
:::

55\.

Alexa Drake, "What Is Mass Marketing and How It's Effective," Learn Hub,
G2, July 29, 2019, https://learn.g2.com/mass-marketing.
::::

:::: {#rf-056 .note}
::: title
:::

56\.

Ashley Lutz, "Nike Is Going after 3 Kinds of Customers," Insider, April
7, 2015,
https://www.businessinsider.com/nike-is-going-after-3-kinds-of-customers-2015-4.
::::

:::: {#rf-057 .note}
::: title
:::

57\.

"Honda," Research & Reviews, Cars.com, accessed June 24, 2022,
https://www.cars.com/research/honda/.
::::

:::: {#rf-058 .note}
::: title
:::

58\.

Smriti Chand, "Target Marketing: Four Generic Target Marketing
Strategies," Your Article Library, last modified December 8, 2013,
https://www.yourarticlelibrary.com/marketing/target-marketing-four-generic-target-marketing-strategies/13400.
::::

:::: {#rf-059 .note}
::: title
:::

59\.

Stevie Langford, "Market Targeting: Why It Pays to Differentiate,"

Hurree's Marketing Blog

, Hurree, January 25, 2022,
https://blog.hurree.co/blog/market-targeting.
::::

:::: {#rf-060 .note}
::: title
:::

60\.

Eric Lam, "What Every Marketer Can Learn from the Stitch Fix IPO,"
Medium, October 27, 2017,
https://medium.com/@elam/what-every-marketer-can-learn-from-the-stitch-fix-ipo-54b208dd416c.
::::

# 

buyer persona

semi-fictional representation of an organization's ideal customers based
on data and research

concentrated marketing

marketing segmentation strategy in which the firm concentrates its
efforts and resources on serving one segment of the market

differentiated marketing

marketing strategy that involves creating marketing campaigns that
appeal to two or more different target audiences, demographics, or
marketing segments

micromarketing

marketing strategy used on a targeted group of customers in a niche
market

target market

group of people with some shared characteristics that a company has
identified as potential customers for its products

undifferentiated marketing

also called mass marketing, a strategy that entails creating one message
for an entire audience
