m00032

33047a45-fd2b-456c-a850-bf51f936c75c

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define product positioning.

Explain approaches to product positioning.

Describe the positioning statement and perceptual maps.

# Product Positioning Defined {#sect-00002}

So far, you've segmented the market by dividing the market into distinct
groups of customers using the segmentation process and you've determined
which customer group(s) you want to focus your marketing efforts
on---the target marketing process. *Product positioning* is the process
of deciding and communicating how an organization wants its market to
think and feel about a product or service.

This third and final step is contained in what's known as the
segmenting, targeting, and positioning model, the STP model. With the
STP model, a company segments the market, selects the target market, and
positions its products and services into the existing marketplace (see
[\#](#)). In their book *Positioning: The Battle for Your Mind*,
marketing gurus Al Ries and Jack Trout write, "The basic approach of
positioning is not to create something new and different, but to
manipulate what's already up there in the mind."

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

The STP model is helpful in identifying your most valuable customers and
developing products and marketing messages that are targeted
specifically toward those customers. This allows you to interact with
each market segment in a more meaningful way by personalizing your
messages (and hopefully selling more of your product!).

For example, Marriott International owns several different hotel chains
that target specific consumer groups:

Courtyard by Marriott focuses on over-the-road travelers who aren't
looking for luxury and all the amenities; they just want a basic, clean
hotel in which to stay during their trip.

Ritz-Carlton

hotels are by their nature more luxurious and target those travelers who
don't mind paying a premium price for more luxury and amenities.

Marriott ExecuStay hotels are aimed at professionals who need a
longer-term place to stay (i.e., an extended stay hotel).

Since these target groups are seeking vastly different things from a
hotel stay, Marriott tailors its marketing messages (and hotels) to
appeal to the unique wants and needs of each specific group.

As you can see, in this last step of the STP process, you want to first
identify how you can most effectively position your product to target
the customer segments that you've determined to be most valuable and
then tailor the marketing mix that will be most effective in reaching
them.

# Approaches to Product Positioning {#sect-00003}

There are two main types of product positioning in marketing:
head-to-head and differentiation. Let's take a look at both.

## Head-to-Head Positioning {#sect-00004}

Head-to-head positioning focuses on comparison. It involves directly
competing with competitors on similar product attributes in the same
market. For instance, let's imagine that you have a small kiosk in a
shopping mall where you serve freshly baked pretzels. If your kiosk
makes different flavors of dough from scratch and your competitors use
only processed frozen dough, you can set your pretzel business apart
from your competitors in your customers' minds by emphasizing that
selling point.

A classic example is when Avis (the car rental company) launched an
advertising campaign that went head-to-head with Hertz, the market
leader. Avis made a point of comparing itself to Hertz and made its
position in the market a selling point using the slogan "When you're
only No. 2, you try harder. Or else." This campaign positioned Avis as a
direct competitor of Hertz and also did something unique: it highlighted
its underdog status, turning it from a liability into an asset. The
results? Prior to the ads, Avis was losing \$3.2 million a year; after
the ads, Avis improved its performance and earned \$1.2 million.
Remarkably, that was the first time in over a decade that Avis had been
profitable.

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
Example of Head-to-Head Positioning
:::

Another good example of head-to-head positioning is Wendy's, which
launched an advertising campaign a few years ago saying that its beef is
fresh, never frozen, versus its competitors, particularly McDonald's.
Check out this Wendy's Super Bowl commercial from 2018 where it goes
head-to-head with McDonald's.

[Iceberg \| Wendy\'s \| Super Bowl 2018 Commercial](#)
::::

## Differentiation Positioning {#sect-00005}

Differentiation positioning is all about emphasizing your product's or
service's unique qualities vis-à-vis the competition. Similar to
head-to-head positioning, you're going to focus on your offerings and
attempt to convince customers to buy your products or services instead
of those of the competition. However, dissimilar to head-to-head
positioning, instead of competing in the same market, you'll attempt to
identify new markets and seek out customers who may be interested in
your offerings because of those unique qualities you've identified.
Common differentiation strategies are intended to draw consumers'
attention to the value, quality, or uniqueness of your offering.

For instance, Curves, the largest women's fitness franchise in the
world, succeeded by offering a fitness alternative to both home-based
exercise routines and traditional health clubs. The experience of a
Curves facility was entirely different from that of a typical health
club. Instead of machines arranged in rows facing a TV, Curves arranged
its machines in a circle to facilitate interaction among members. There
were few (if any) mirrors and no men staring. The result was that Curves
did not compete head-to-head with other health and exercise concepts;
rather, it created new demand.

# Positioning Statements {#sect-00006}

In your other college courses, you may have heard terms such as *vision
statement* and *mission statement*. We're going to add a third term to
your vocabulary---*positioning statement*. Essentially, a positioning
statement briefly describes your brand, product, service, and target
market. Not only does it define how your brand meets the customer's
needs, but it also tries to clarify why it does so better than your
competition. It answers the question "What experience do you want your
customers to have with this product or service?"

Templates for writing your positioning statement abound. Here are just a
few examples:

\[Your brand\] provides \[your offering/benefit that makes you better
than competitors\] for \[your customers\] who \[customer needs\] because
\[the reason why your customers should believe you are better than
competitors\].

:::: {#note-00007 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

For \[target audience\], \[brand name\] is the \[your market\] that
delivers \[your points of differentiation\] so they can \[end benefit\]
because \[your evidence\].

:::: {#note-00008 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Now let's take a look at some examples of positioning statements for
companies with which you're likely familiar so that you can see these
templates in action:

Amazon

: "For consumers who want to purchase a wide range of products online
with quick delivery, Amazon provides a one-stop online shopping site.
Amazon sets itself apart from other online retailers with its customer
obsession, passion for innovation, and commitment to operational
excellence."

:::: {#note-00009 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Apple

: "For individuals who want the best personal computer or mobile device,
Apple leads the technology with the most innovative products. Apple
emphasizes technological research and advancement and takes an
innovative approach to business best practices---it considers the impact
our products and processes have on its customers and the planet."

:::: {#note-00010 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

McDonald's: "For individuals looking for a quick-service restaurant with
an exceptional customer experience, McDonald's is a leader in the
fast-food industry, with friendly service and consistency across
thousands of convenient locations. McDonald's dedication to improving
operations and customer satisfaction sets it apart from other fast-food
restaurants."

:::: {#note-00011 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Coca-Cola

: "For individuals looking for high quality beverages, Coca-Cola offers
a wide range of the most refreshing options---each creates a positive
experience for customers when they enjoy a Coca-Cola brand drink. Unlike
other beverage options, Coca-Cola products inspire happiness and make a
positive difference in customers' lives, and the brand is intensely
focused on the needs of consumers and customers."

:::: {#note-00012 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

# Perceptual Positioning Maps and How They Are Used {#sect-00007}

A perceptual map is a visual diagram that shows how the average target
market consumer perceives your product versus those of your competitors.

A perceptual map uses two determinant attributes on a graph. Determinant
attributes are those attributes that a customer uses in making their
purchase decision. In other words, what you do believe consumers' "hot
buttons" are with respect to your product or service offering? You've
got a vast array of determinant attributes to use. You could use price
versus quality, sugar versus protein, or any number of other attributes.
The bottom line is that these attributes should reflect what customers
are looking for in the product or service.

Once you've established the determinant attributes, you plot your
product offering onto the map. Let's imagine that your company is
getting ready to introduce a new nutritional drink for seniors. You
might start out with determinant attributes like high/low sugar and
high/low protein (although you could use other determinant attributes
like price, taste, etc.). Step one of your perceptual map might look
something like [\#](#).

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

Now it's time to map your offering as well as the competitors' offerings
on the perceptual map. The simple combination of these two scores places
the product offering onto the map. It's not necessary to list every
single competitor on this perceptual map, but you should try for a list
of at least 5 to 10 competitors.

Once you've mapped your competitors' offerings on the perceptual map, it
may look something like [\#](#) (although you would have brand names in
the circles instead of "Brand A," "Brand B," etc.).

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

Once you have developed the perceptual map, you will have a clearer idea
of where your product or service offering stands vis-à-vis your
competition. You will look at which brands occupy the same space as your
offering (or a nearly identical space) based on consumer attitudes.
Things to look for on your perceptual map include:

Do consumer attitudes toward your offering align with what you want them
to think about it?

Do consumer attitudes toward your competitors' offerings align what you
thought consumers would think about them?

Look at the map closely and determine which of your competitors'
offerings consumers perceive as being closest to your offering.

Perceptual maps are also an opportunity to determine if there are any
holes or gaps in the map. This may signal that there is potential for
new offerings.

:::: {#note-00014 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Some other things to think about once you've completed your perceptual
map:

If consumer attitudes toward your offering aren't what you expected, it
may be necessary to change your marketing actions to correct or modify
these consumers' attitudes.

Let's assume for a minute that consumers view your competitors'
offerings as being very similar to yours. If this is the case, you may
want to think about ways to make your offering stand out from the
competition rather than going head-to-head with competitors.

If there are gaps in the map that you think you can fill based on your
company's capabilities, you may want to consider introducing a new
offering or moving your offering into an unfilled position by modifying
its features and attributes.

:::: {#note-00015 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00008}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00009}

:::: {#rf-061 .note}
::: title
:::

61\.

Al Ries and Jack Trout,

Positioning: The Battle for Your Mind

(New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001), 5.
::::

:::: {#rf-062 .note}
::: title
:::

62\.

"Explore Our Brands," Marriott Bonvoy, Marriott International, accessed
February 23, 2022, https://www.marriott.com/marriott-brands.mi.
::::

:::: {#rf-063 .note}
::: title
:::

63\.

Seth Stevenson, "We're No. 2! We're No. 2!," Slate, August 12, 2013,
https://slate.com/business/2013/08/hertz-vs-avis-advertising-wars-how-an-ad-firm-made-a-virtue-out-of-second-place.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-064 .note}
::: title
:::

64\.

Devra Gartenstein, "Two Types of Product Positioning," Bizfluent, Leaf
Group, February 5, 2019,
https://bizfluent.com/info-8352422-two-types-product-positioning.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-065 .note}
::: title
:::

65\.

Chan Kim and Renée Mauborgne, "Curves," Blue Ocean Strategy, Blue Ocean
Global Network, last modified January 26, 2022,
https://www.blueoceanstrategy.com/bos-moves/curves/.
::::

:::: {#rf-066 .note}
::: title
:::

66\.

Hannah Tow, "Awesome Brand Positioning Statement Examples (+Template),"
Learn Hub, G2, April 30, 2019,
https://learn.g2.com/positioning-statement-examples.
::::

:::: {#rf-067 .note}
::: title
:::

67\.

"Positioning Statement: 7 Examples and How to Write One," HelpCenter,
Shark Byte, August 23, 2021,
https://www.helpcenterapp.com/blog/how-to-write-positioning-statement-examples/.
::::

:::: {#rf-068 .note}
::: title
:::

68\.

Shark Byte, "Positioning Statement."
::::

:::: {#rf-069 .note}
::: title
:::

69\.

Shark Byte, "Positioning Statement."
::::

:::: {#rf-070 .note}
::: title
:::

70\.

Shark Byte, "Positioning Statement."
::::

:::: {#rf-071 .note}
::: title
:::

71\.

Meredith Hart, "12 Examples of Positioning Statements & How to Craft
Your Own,"

HubSpot Blog

, HubSpot, updated August 25, 2021,
https://blog.hubspot.com/sales/positioning-statement.
::::

:::: {#rf-072 .note}
::: title
:::

72\.

"Understanding Perceptual Maps," Market Segmentation Study Guide,
accessed March 23, 2022,
https://www.segmentationstudyguide.com/understanding-perceptual-maps/perceptual-maps/.
::::

:::: {#rf-073 .note}
::: title
:::

73\.

Angela Hausman, "How to Build a Perceptual Map That Explodes Your ROI,"
MKT Maven, Hausman and Associates, October 16, 2020,
https://www.hausmanmarketingletter.com/how-to-build-perceptual-map/.
::::

:::: {#rf-074 .note}
::: title
:::

74\.

Hausman, "Build a Perceptual Map."
::::

# 

determinant attributes

those attributes of a product or service that consumers rely upon when
making a purchase decision

differentiation positioning

product/service positioning based on the differentiating characteristics
or qualities that make an organization better than its competitors in
the mind of the target audience

head-to-head positioning

directly competing with competitors on similar product attributes in the
same market

perceptual map

visual depiction of how target customers view and feel about a given
brand or product

positioning statement

short description of an organization's target market(s) and the
product(s) provided to them

product positioning

the process of deciding and communicating how an organization wants its
market to think and feel about a product or service

STP model

three-step marketing framework in which an organization segments the
market, selects target market(s), and positions its products or services
