m00137

720fb33b-931f-4f91-9bfa-412019d3d413

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Discuss ethical implications of target market selection.

Provide an example of a company that displays ethics in target
marketing.

# Ethical Implications of Target Market Selection {#sect-00002}

To understand unethical target marketing, let's first review the notion
of ethics in this realm. Ethics is the systematic study of
morality---what people commonly refer to as "morals." The American
Marketing Association (AMA) has a clear Statement of Ethics, and
marketers are expected to conform to this ethical code. Before examining
the issue of ethical target marketing, let's first review the general
notion of ethics as it applies to marketing and other business
disciplines.

Individuals and organizations choose to act morally---or
immorally---when faced with a moral dilemma. The decision of whether to
behave in a moral way or an immoral one has serious implications for
oneself, for other individuals, and for society as a whole. The bottom
line is that morally responsible, ethical marketers both sympathize with
and empathize with consumers and their legitimate needs and wants.
However, there are moral issues in terms of who is targeted and with
what purpose. To illustrate these points, let's review some examples of
target marketing tactics that can reasonably be construed to be immoral
or unethical.

## Ethnic and Racial Profiling {#sect-00003}

Earlier in this chapter, we used the example of a firm advertising
woodworking equipment in specialty magazines rather than general
interest magazines in order to stretch its limited advertising dollars.
Do-it-yourselfers, amateur woodworkers, or hobbyists would be considered
an affinity audience to the firm---that group of potential customers who
have interests or hobbies in common. That's the positive aspect of
target marketing.

However, there's a negative aspect to targeting affinity audiences as
well. Over the past few years, Facebook has been criticized for
potential discrimination on its ad platform by excluding users who have
been classified into certain racial or ethnic affinity groups. As a
matter of fact, Facebook was sued by the US Department of Housing and
Urban Development because its algorithms allowed advertisers to
purposely target their ads by race, gender, and religion, potentially
violating federal laws that prevent discrimination in ads for jobs,
housing, and credit.

Facebook's algorithm and machine learning allowed advertisers to
purposely target their ads by race, gender, and religion. In itself,
trying to reach an affinity audience through advertising isn't illegal.
The problem comes in because Facebook's platform allowed advertisers to
exclude users based on that algorithm. For example, with Facebook's
"ethnic affinity" marketing product, the company has the ability to
exclude users by race or ethnicity.

## Children and Teens {#sect-00004}

According to Statista, there are approximately 73 million children in
the United States between the ages of 0 and 17. That's a huge target
market that can be extraordinarily lucrative for a marketer.
Accordingly, it makes sense to target this demographic because of its
potential value.

However, there are inherent ethical issues involved in marketing to
children, including distinguishing intent, gender stereotypes, violence,
and obesity. Let's first consider distinguishing intent. According to
the American Psychological Association (APA), children under the age of
7 or 8 can't discern the "persuasive intent" of advertising. In other
words, they don't realize that the marketing message is made to sell
something to them. Instead, children tend to accept the content at face
value and believe that it's true, accurate, fair, and unbiased. This
lack of distinguishing intent can potentially exploit children because
it takes advantage of their inability to make sound, calculated
decisions about a product or service based on the available information.

Now let's consider gender stereotypes. At approximately age 2, children
become conscious of the physical differences between boys and girls, and
according to the Campaign for a Commercial-Free Childhood (CCFC),
gender-stereotyped messages can interfere with that process. Consider
the number of gender-stereotyped toys on the market today (or go to the
toy section of any big-box store). For example, there are approximately
40,000 Disney Princess items on the market today, typically aimed at
girls, whereas toys like Transformers are typically marketed to boys.

Violence is still another ethical issue to consider. Research indicates
that more than half of TV shows and even some commercials (particularly
those for video games) contain violence, and the concern is that
watching violence may desensitize youth to it and may even suggest to
youngsters that violence is an effective way to settle conflicts.

Another ethical issue is childhood obesity. According to the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), childhood obesity has "more than
tripled since the 1970s," and it's estimated that one in five
school-aged children is obese. Yet watch the commercials on children's
TV shows, and you'll find that they are almost completely dominated by
unhealthy food products like candy, sugary cereal, and snacks. To their
credit, some forward-thinking companies have made it a practice not to
advertise to children under 12 because of the association with childhood
obesity. For instance, according to the Council of Better Business
Bureaus, Brach's, Lemonhead, Ghirardelli, Jelly Belly, PEEPS, Mike and
Ike, and Welch's Fruit Snacks avoid advertising to children under 12.

Let's examine still another societal problem---vaping. According to
recent studies, approximately four million students admit to vaping, an
increase of over two million users. One of the major players in the
industry is Juul, which has been criticized for targeting adolescents
with colorful packaging; flavors like mint, crème, and mango; and a USB
flash drive design that made the product small and easy to conceal in a
backpack, pocket, or even a hoodie. The problem has become so pervasive
with young people that, in June of 2022, the US Food and Drug
Administration was poised to issue an order removing Juul Labs vaping
products from the market.

## Marketing to the Elderly {#sect-00005}

Older adults are also often exploited by target marketers. Older adults
often have fixed incomes along with health problems, and this has made
them a poplar target for products that give "assurances" of good health
and affordability. The most common instances of bad ethics involve
prescription drug targeting. Misleading statements about product
efficacy are rampant, whether it's for a prominent drug manufacturer or
a company that markets "natural" or "organic" products. The COVID-19
pandemic has seen this problem emerge in full force, with many brands
touting a "cure-all" to alleviate the virus. The bottom line is that
elderly audiences may make questionable purchasing decisions if they
believe their health may be at risk as a result of not taking action.

## Low-Income Targeting {#sect-00006}

Low-income earners tend to be more susceptible to ads that promise a
better way of life, such as high APR (annual percentage rate) credit
cards and multilevel marketing schemes. Targeting low-income audiences
can pose a threat to their safety and ultimately have dire legal
ramifications.

Low-income earners can also be wrongfully excluded from the market if
companies curtail or fail to enable consumption of products because they
"assume" the consumers cannot afford the product(s) at the specified
price.

:::: {#note-00013 .note}
::: title
Subway
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

We've just read about some of the ways that children are targeted in
negative or unhealthy ways, so let's take a look at one company that
tried to get it right, Subway (see [\#](#)).

Back in 2014, Subway aligned itself with then--First Lady Michelle
Obama's Let's Move! initiative. The company vowed to spend \$41 million
over a three-year period to promote a healthy-eating program aimed
specifically toward children. The ad campaign bore the slogan "Playtime:
Powered by Veggies."

But Subway didn't stop there. The company also teamed up with the
Partnership for a Healthier America (PHA), a nonprofit organization that
works with the private sector to help advance the goals of Mrs. Obama's
Let's Move! initiative.

Suzanne Greco, vice president of operations for Subway, stated, "From a
sign on each restaurant's door that says 'Playtime Powered by Veggies'
to a video collaboration with Disney's The Muppets, \[Subway\] will
build upon our ongoing efforts to create better choices for families."

Watch this video on the partnership between Subway and the Let's Move!
initiative.

[First Lady Michelle Obama announced today that the Subway sandwich
chain is launching a 3-year, \$41](#)
::::

#  {#sect-00007}

In this chapter, market segmentation is defined and the differences
between segmenting B2C, B2B, and international markets are explored.
Segmentation, plus targeting and positioning, are the major elements of
a customer-driven marketing strategy. Smart marketers know they can't
reach and serve every buyer, so they approach the broader market with
tools that help them identify, select, and position their products for
consumers who are most likely to need the company's products and
services.

Better understanding B2C or B2B markets also helps marketers better
understand unmet needs, assisting in the development of new products and
services. Targeted marketing, top-notch customer service, and new
product developments that are based upon customer needs result in
customer experiences that successfully reinforce brand loyalty.

#  {#sect-00008}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00009}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00010}

There are numerous examples of successful personal brands. For good
examples, read this [article from the Webflow blog where 18 of the best
personal brand examples in 2022 are listed.](#) Using what you learned
in this chapter about marketing to target markets and using the
inspiration and knowledge gained from this article, write the opening
page to your website. Keep in mind the things shared in the article on
what made the personal brands stand out. And know your target market so
you can craft a message that will appeal to them.

#  {#sect-00011}

Utilize LinkedIn to find two sales managers in your geographic area and
invite them to connect with you. Try using what you now know about
segmentation, targeting, and positioning to consider industries you'd
like to work in, where they might be located, and how you can make your
resume appealing to them. Can you craft a compelling message that
encourages sales managers to connect with you? Once linked, "interview"
at least one sales professional and ask questions about what they enjoy
most and least about their sales careers.

#  {#sect-00012}

## Travelers Point Distillery {#sect-00013}

In early 2000, several friends got together to tell stories and drink
bourbon. It was obvious that friends and stories come together with good
bourbon. The best stories included the rich family history of Master
Distiller Mel Lytton.

Dating back to the 1880s and into prohibition, Mel's great grandfather
distilled bourbon in rural Virginia. Having grown up in a bourbon
family, Mel not only had the ability to detect all the subtle flavors of
a great bourbon, but he had the family recipe that had been passed down
through the generations. And Mel knew how to distill it.

Mel had more stories than most. Having mastered the art of just about
everything he set out to do, Mel was a stone mason, a blacksmith, and a
carpenter skilled at woodworking. As Mel talked about the bourbon he was
tasting and told stories of his family distilling in the mountains and
backwoods of Virginia, an idea was born. The friends decided they would
love to get into the business of distilling bourbon.

Bourbon is a truly American drink. It is generally aged in oak barrels
and made with grain, primarily corn. Bourbon can range in price from
thousands of dollars to \$40--50 per bottle. In the early 1960s,
Congress declared bourbon "America's Native Spirit."

While traditionally bourbon is mostly consumed by men, it is catching on
with women too. In fact, bourbon is quickly gaining popularity among
those 21 and over. "The Kentucky Bourbon Trail and the Kentucky Bourbon
Trail Craft Tour have drawn more than 2.5 million visitors from all 50
states and 25 countries in the last five years and have become leading
educational and tourism attractions."

With the growth and popularity of bourbon drinking and collecting, it
was clear that there was room in the industry for one more bourbon
brand.

Mel's family recipe and his history of distilling made the group of
friends confident in their ability to provide a craft or small-batch
bourbon that would be equal to if not better than many currently
available. They formed the company and found the perfect location to
open the distillery---an old granary in the heart of America's farming
country in Kirklin, Indiana. The community is uniquely located in the
middle of the state with a major highway passing through the middle of
the town. Kirklin truly is the crossroads of America.

With the original group of investors and a few additions, the business
was formed. Mel began distilling the bourbon. It was put in barrels and
up in the rack room to age. The label, the brand, and the distribution
were in the works.

The group determined that some of the best things in life included
bourbon and travels. In fact, many of the stories they told over a great
glass of bourbon included their many collective travels around the
world. The name for their new bourbon was decided---Travelers Point. It
wouldn't be long before Travelers Point began marketing its bourbon.

As the company considered its branding and value proposition, the
founders knew they wanted to have a unique story of production along
with a price point that ranked with some of the premium bourbon brands
currently on the market. Travelers Point bourbon would sell for around
\$45--60 per bottle. This would put it in the ranks of some of the
sought-after brands with a following among die-hard bourbon drinkers.

The difference in Travelers Point is obvious to discerning bourbon
drinkers. The bourbon profile is unique, with deep caramel notes and a
rich combination of oak and vanilla. Many bourbon drinkers enjoy the
hunt for the perfect bourbon. Travelers Point has something special.
Finding the market segment that is ready for a new bourbon with a long
history will be critical to its marketing success.

For more information about [Travelers Point Distillery, check out their
website](#).

## Case Questions {#sect-00014}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00015}

Complete the following information about the company and
products/services you chose to focus on as you develop the marketing
plan throughout the course. You may need to conduct research in order to
obtain necessary information.

Instructions: Using the Marketing Plan Template file you created from
the [Marketing and Customer Value](#) assignment and expanded upon in
[Strategic Planning in Marketing](#), complete the following sections of
your marketing plan:

Market Segmentation

Target Market

Buyer Personas

Positioning

Submit the marketing plan to your instructor for grading and feedback.

# Endnotes {#sect-00016}

:::: {#rf-075 .note}
::: title
:::

75\.

Karen Hao, "Facebook's Ad-Serving Algorithm Discriminates by Gender and
Race,"

MIT Technology Review

, April 5, 2019,
https://www.technologyreview.com/2019/04/05/1175/facebook-algorithm-discriminates-ai-bias/.
::::

:::: {#rf-076 .note}
::: title
:::

76\.

Safiya U. Noble and Sarah T. Roberts, "Targeting Race in Ads Is Nothing
New, but the Stakes Are High,"

USA Today

, November 12, 2016,
https://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/columnist/2016/11/12/targeting-race-ads-nothing-new-but-stakes-high/93638386/.
::::

:::: {#rf-077 .note}
::: title
:::

77\.

"Number of Children in the United States in 2019, by Age Group,"
Statista, January 20, 2021, accessed October 21, 2021,
https://www.statista.com/statistics/457786/number-of-children-in-the-us-by-age/.
::::

:::: {#rf-078 .note}
::: title
:::

78\.

"Exploitative Ethical Issues in Target Marketing," Paypervids, last
modified November 10, 2017,
https://www.paypervids.com/exploitative-ethical-issues-target-marketing/.
::::

:::: {#rf-079 .note}
::: title
:::

79\.

14ideas, "Marketing to Kids: Is It an Issue?," Medium, April 19, 2017,
https://medium.com/@14ideas/marketing-to-kids-is-it-an-issue-9df4b7085977.
::::

:::: {#rf-080 .note}
::: title
:::

80\.

Paula Giuffrida, "Letter: Time to Stop Violence on TV, Video Games,"
letter to the editor,

Eagle-Tribune

(North Andover, MA), April 22, 2022,
https://www.eagletribune.com/opinion/letters_to_the_editor/letter-time-to-stop-violence-on-tv-video-games/article_42a1f22a-c19a-11ec-a152-9bab49ace2f0.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-081 .note}
::: title
:::

81\.

"Childhood Overweight & Obesity," Overweight & Obesity, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, last reviewed April 1, 2022,
https://www.cdc.gov/obesity/childhood/index.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-082 .note}
::: title
:::

82\.

14ideas, "Marketing to Kids."
::::

:::: {#rf-083 .note}
::: title
:::

83\.

"Did Juul Target Teens, Knowing They'd Get Hooked?," WebMD, accessed
June 24, 2022,
https://www.webmd.com/connect-to-care/vaping/did-juul-target-young-people-smoking.
::::

:::: {#rf-084 .note}
::: title
:::

84\.

Ken Alltucker, "Report: Federal Ban on Popular Juul Products Forthcoming
amid Youth Vaping Concerns,"

USA Today

, June 22, 2022,
https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/health/2022/06/22/fda-ban-juul-products-amid-youth-vaping-concerns-report-says/7701204001/.
::::

:::: {#rf-085 .note}
::: title
:::

85\.

"Ethical Target Advertising: Where Should Marketing Draw the Line?,"

Out of the Blue Blog

, Blue Laser Digital, September 3, 2021,
https://www.bluelaserdigital.com/ethical-target-advertising.
::::

:::: {#rf-086 .note}
::: title
:::

86\.

Blue Laser Digital, "Ethical Target Advertising."
::::

:::: {#rf-087 .note}
::: title
:::

87\.

Lynette Holloway, "First Lady, Subway Launch Healthy Eating Campaign for
Kids," NewsOne, Interactive One, January 24, 2014,
https://newsone.com/2848891/michelle-obama-subway/.
::::

:::: {#rf-088 .note}
::: title
:::

88\.

"Did You Know?," Kentucky Bourbon Trail, Kentucky Distillers'
Association, accessed March 23, 2022, https://kybourbontrail.com/about/.
::::

:::: {#rf-089 .note}
::: title
:::

89\.

Travelers Point Distillery (website), accessed March 23, 2022,
https://travelerspointdistillery.com/.
::::

# 

affinity audience

a group of potential customers who have interests or hobbies in common
