m00096

98f1511f-2f18-41e1-a453-cde164243d3e

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Since 1919, when Conrad Hilton bought his first hotel, Hilton Hotels and
Resorts has been providing a good night's sleep to travelers around the
world. With over 6,800 hotels within its portfolio (including several
sub-brands), Hilton has a hotel to meet the needs of just about any
traveler. Hampton Inn is a beloved brand for road-weary business
travelers as well as families. The Conrad is one of the luxury brands
for Hilton. And DoubleTree is another favorite brand for business
travelers, known for the gooey, warm chocolate chip cookies presented at
check-in. To reward travelers, Hilton offers several tiers of Hilton
rewards: Silver, Gold, and Diamond. Reward members are able to trade
their points for various perks, including free nights. During off-peak
travel, Hilton offers a variety of sales promotions; for example, one
program it offers is 3X points on every stay for three nights or more.

Consumers who travel often are able to increase their points through
certain purchases and promotions that Hilton will offer to spur more
travel. Hilton also connects with customers through Hilton Grand
Vacations (HGV). HGV is a time-share within the Hilton portfolio of
properties and rooms. When customers join HGV, they are buying ownership
in the exclusive club properties.

To increase the sale of the HGV properties, Hilton runs promotions to
sign Hilton customers for a tour of a new property and a presentation
about the benefits of ownership. In exchange for participating in a tour
of HGV properties, customers are offered incentives, such as three
nights and four days of a Hilton hotel stay for a discounted price. In
exchange for the discounted rooms, customers agree to a tour and to sit
through a sales presentation.

HGV sales professionals are typically real estate agents who understand
how to structure vacation rental properties and time-share sales. Every
sales professional selling the HGV properties is well-versed in the cost
of vacations, how to structure real estate deals, and the benefits of
being a member of HGV. Once a customer agrees to the tour and the sales
presentation, the sales representative is tasked with making sure the
decision makers are present, and when possible, the goal is to have
customers make their decision before the tour is over. These strategies
have been very effective at generating continuous streams of income from
HGV members.
