m00097

3a5a2721-226f-462b-8532-406c6be6a65a

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define personal selling.

Discuss the role of personal selling in the promotion mix.

# Personal Selling Defined {#sect-00002}

Personal selling is the one-on-one interaction between a company
representative (salesperson) and the buyer (customer or prospect). The
interaction is intended for the salesperson to uncover the needs and
wants of the prospect and discuss how the product or service will help
to satisfy the customer's needs and wants. The salesperson works to
develop a relationship with the prospect with the intention of having
them buy the company's product and become a customer.

# The Role of Personal Selling in the Promotion Mix {#sect-00003}

The promotion mix includes the marketer's tactics for communicating with
consumers. Determining how to use the promotion mix is dependent on the
goals and objectives of the overall marketing strategy as well as the
nature of the product, the market segments being targeted, and the
message the marketer wishes to send.

Generally, marketers will use a combination of the promotion mix tactics
to create an integrated approach to connecting with customers. Out of
all the promotion mix strategies, personal selling is the strategy that
connects directly with the customer in a one-on-one setting and focuses
on building relationships. Personal selling is ideal if the product is
more complex in nature, higher in price, and customizable according to a
customer's needs.

# Relationship Selling {#sect-00004}

Relationship selling is a method of personal selling used to better
understand the needs and wants of the buyer. If the product is
relatively high in price and has some customizable attributes, the
salesperson will strive to become a trusted advisor to the customer.
This allows the salesperson to develop a relationship that will create
trust and ultimately fit the best product with the customer to fulfill
their needs and wants and solve a problem they are having that put them
in the market for the product. TalEx, a fast-growing human resource
company, works with its clients to find the right talent for open
positions at a variety of companies. Sales representatives for TalEx
work as trusted advisors to collaborate with clients to help find the
right staffing solutions for growing companies.

# When to Use Personal Selling {#sect-00005}

Personal selling is best utilized as a promotional strategy when the
products are higher in price, variable in nature, and require some
explanation or education. Hilton Grand Vacations (HGV) employs real
estate agents to sell club memberships. Due to the variety of membership
purchase levels, the explanation and education of how to use the
membership, and the higher price of the time-share vacations, the sales
force spends time educating clients about the product. Typically,
personal selling is used for products that are also in the introductory
stage of the product life cycle and for products that require
significant follow-up after the sale. Business-to-business (B2B)
strategies are largely reliant on personal selling as a primary
promotional strategy.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
Personal Selling
:::

Watch this video to learn more about personal selling. Learn when
personal selling is most relevant, the cons, and what types of products
it is most suited for.

[Marketing - What is Personal Selling?](#)

Watch this personal selling role-play to gain insight into a sales call
situation, and [read this guide for the advantages, the disadvantages,
the process, the strategies, and examples of personal selling](#).

[Personal Selling Role Play](#)
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00006}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# 

personal selling

communication between a buyer and seller. The primary responsibility is
to build a relationship with the buyer.

relationship selling

a method of personal selling used to better understand the needs and
wants of the buyer
