m00098

08b70bcc-6213-4476-8194-98ea0e40bbde

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

List the various roles involved in personal selling. 

Describe the differences between the various personal selling roles.

# Order Takers {#sect-00002}

Within the role of personal selling, there are various types of selling
functions. Many organizations utilize more than one type of personal
selling. Various sales personnel within an organization may fulfill
several of the roles. The type of personal selling is dependent on the
nature of the product as well as the customer.

In many sales situations, the salesperson is responsible for prospecting
to find new customers as well as working to match the right products
with the customer needs and wants. However, some organizations have
sales personnel that are only responsible for taking orders from
customers, called order takers. They work to identify the customer and
find the right product fit. Within the role of the order taker, there
are typically two different types of order takers, inside and outside.

## Inside Order Takers {#sect-00003}

An inside order taker is the person who talks with a customer when they
walk into the business to place an order, or they are the one who is
answering the phone, responding to an online inquiry, or responding to
an email to accept customer orders as they are placed. Often the inside
order taker may have to answer questions or discuss details of the
product order. Their role is to serve as the liaison between the
customer and the company. They make sure the right product is ordered
according to the requests of the customers.

Restaurants typically replenish inventory on a weekly basis. When a
sandwich shop calls its supplier to order more paper products and
cleaning supplies, it calls the inside order taker. For some businesses,
the inside order taker may be referred to as an inbound customer service
agent. In this case, the inside order taker will make sure they have the
order submitted correctly and will typically communicate about any
out-of-stock products or any variation of the typical order.

Another type of inside order taker is in the business-to-consumer (B2C)
market, where a consumer will shop at a store and pick a product. An
example of this would be the cashier at Walmart or other retail outlet.
When the consumer is ready to pay for the product, and if they choose to
check out with a cashier rather than the self-checkout option, they are
checking out with the inside order taker. In the role of inside order
taker, the cashier carefully scans each of the products and completes
the sale. For online retailers, the inside order taker is the one making
sure the products ordered from the online shopper are in stock and
available for fulfillment. They may contact the customer if the product
is unavailable or if there are questions about the order.

## Outside Order Takers {#sect-00004}

Outside order takers work with customers who routinely buy products, and
their role is to take in and process those orders. The outside order
taker is not required to persuade a customer to purchase, but rather
they are a resource for the customer in fulfilling orders. In addition,
they are a resource to their customer and may offer insight and advice
on inventory patterns and expected delivery times.

Your neighborhood hair salon is a good example of a business that relies
on an outside order taker. Hair salons typically have both a supply of
the products they use on their customers and a supply of products they
sell to their customers for home use. The beauty products sales force
consists of multiple sales roles. However, the outside order taker
routinely checks in with the salon owner and will fill out the order
sheets to replenish product stock that is low.

# Order Getters {#sect-00005}

The role of the order getter is critically important to the revenue of
many businesses. The order getter is responsible for finding customers
and persuading them to purchase. They might also be responsible for
increasing orders from current customers. The order getter is typically
well versed in their products and has superior knowledge about the
industry. Additionally, successful order getters are often viewed as a
trusted advisor by the customers they serve. Many businesses rely
heavily on the order getter to work with them to solve their problems
through the products they represent.

The order getter must be able to listen to the customer and respond with
solutions that will be mutually beneficial to both companies. In the
role of the order getter, it is not uncommon to work with a customer for
a year or more before ever making a sale. iSalus is a perfect example of
this. In an effort to get the company's cutting-edge patient engagement
software into health systems, the sales force must identify the decision
makers within the health system as well as work with those who will be
using the software. Educating and engaging with a variety of teams
within the health system, as well as waiting on budget approvals, can
take anywhere from 6 to 18 months. Laying the foundation can be a
lengthy process but can be very rewarding when everything comes together
and the sale is made.

# Support Personnel {#sect-00006}

A typical sales force includes various support personnel that help
facilitate the sales process. Support personnel can take on many
functions in the process of making the sale, including marketing,
prospecting, setting appointments, educating customers, building
goodwill, checking inventory and order status, as well as providing
service after the sale. There are two primary types of support personnel
utilized in the sales process: missionary salespeople and technical
specialists.

## Missionary Salespeople {#sect-00007}

Missionary salespeople are often employed by manufacturing firms to
represent the company and call on retailers in an effort to inform or
persuade them to buy the firm's products. In some cases, they may also
be referred to as a detailer. It is the job of the missionary
salesperson to inform customers about new products and promotional
specials and to encourage new orders and reorders. Missionary
salespeople are most common with manufacturing, pharmaceutical, and
software companies. A salesperson for McKesson Corporation's
pharmaceutical products will work with physicians in their territory.
Typically, they meet with the physicians, provide education on new
products, leave samples, and connect with the physician's practice on a
regular basis to keep the company's products in use.

## Technical Specialists {#sect-00008}

A technical specialist serves as an assistant to a firm's existing
customers. Their role is to advise on many aspects of the product, such
as technical specifications, application, design, and installation. As
the name implies, this job is highly technical and often requires formal
training. Many people in the role of the technical specialist have
backgrounds in science or engineering. The types of products and the
applications for the products determine the need for and training of the
technical specialist.

# Team Selling {#sect-00009}

Many of today's customers and products are complex. The more expensive
and high-tech the product, the more important it is to have a team of
people to assist the client in making sure the product meets their needs
and wants. Team selling is a sales approach that can improve the
likelihood of a good experience that meets or exceeds the customer's
expectations. Team selling involves the lead salesperson bringing in
other functional support people from within the organization. Other
functions that are often involved include finance, engineering, and
accounting. These various functions can assist with the skills and
knowledge to address specific customer problems or issues and work
through objections or special circumstances that may be required to make
the sale. Bringing extra skills and knowledge to the situation can make
for a better product fit and a good outcome whereby the client sees the
company and products as invaluable.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
Personal Selling
:::

Personal selling is a technique used by sales professionals to make a
connection and possible sale with customers. There are several
techniques and tips for personal selling, and you can [read about them
in this Indeed article](#).

There are many types of sales jobs. If a career in sales interests you,
spend time learning about the different kinds of sales jobs and how they
differ. Start by [reading this article to learn about the things to
consider](#) in a sales job, types of sales job titles, and job types.
Read this [article from Indeed about all the various](#) types of sales
jobs to explore.

There is a lot to explore when learning about sales jobs. Check out
these resources to learn more:

Indeed: "

10 Sales Skills Reps Should Have

"

ResumeGenius: "

Top 12 Sales Skills for Your Resume + Examples

"

Brainshark: "

17 Sales Skills All Reps Need

"

LiveAbout: "

Important Sales Skills That Employers Value

"

HubSpot: "

How to Understand & Thrive in Digital Sales"

HubSpot: "

The Best Sales Job Boards for Finding or Filling a Sales Job

"

A career in sales can be fast-paced, exhilarating, and competitive. If
sales interests you, be sure to do your homework so that you're sure to
find a position and industry you're passionate about.
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00010}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# 

inside order taker

a salesclerk or order clerk that is employed for a company that address
questions and complete the final sale

missionary salespeople

individuals who have the power to influence the customer to purchase a
product or service

order getters

highly trained salespeople who know their products, services involved,
and competition across the street

order takers

sales personnel that are responsible for taking orders from customers by
identifying the customer and finding the right product fit

outside order takers

salespeople out in the trenches, visiting customers and delivering
inventory to retailers and wholesalers

support personnel

fulfill the responsibilities that assist the sales team in supporting
the customer and completing the sale

team selling

the practice of involving a group of people familiar with the viewpoints
and concerns of a customer's key decision makers to sell and service a
major account

technical specialist

a salesperson who has extensive product knowledge and uses this
knowledge as the focal aspect of the sales presentation
