m00099

88089cfa-703b-430d-8e7a-76b39f63d546

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

List the steps in the personal selling process.

Describe each step in the personal selling process.

# Step 1: Prospecting and Qualifying {#sect-00002}

The selling process is a seven-step process (see [\#](#)) used for
selling a product. The process can be multifaceted, lengthy, and
complex, depending on the product and the prospect. While all
salespeople are different, generally most sales professionals go through
the same selling process.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

The first step in the sales process is to find, or prospect for, strong
potential customers. In prospecting, sales professionals will work to
create and develop a database of potential customers, called sales leads
through lead generation. Getting the names and contact information for
the database is the act of prospecting. Each business or company has its
own methods of prospecting and qualifying. For some companies, the
process is rigorous and lengthy; for others, it can be nothing more than
a quick phone conversation.

There are many methods of lead generation. Utilizing digital strategies
is one example. Many companies may prospect leads through a digital
advertising campaign that triggers potential customers to sign up for
information about a product. Other forms of prospecting can include
meeting potential customers at trade shows, use of a referral program,
or purchasing a list of customers from a third-party company that meets
the criteria for the target market.

Once the sales professional has a database of leads, the next step is
qualification of those leads. Not all names in a database may be the
right candidates for a company's products. There are many reasons why a
candidate may not be a good fit for a company's products. For example,
some leads may have recently purchased a competitor's product, and
others may not be in a financial position to afford the product. The
sales professional wants to reduce the list to include only the leads
who are a good fit and are more likely to be receptive to purchasing the
company's products. Qualification may also include making sure the
contact has the authority to make the purchasing decision.

You might be asking yourself how a salesperson or company tracks these
leads and keeps all the various communication touch points organized.
They typically have two software tools to help them: sales force
automation (SFA) and customer relationship management (CRM) software.
SFAs are used to acquire a customer, and CRMs are used to retain and
manage customers after the sale.

According to Salesforce, a company known for one of the most popular
CRMs on the market, CRM software "is a technology for managing all your
company's relationships and interactions with customers and potential
customers. The goal is simple: Improve business relationships to grow
your business."

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
Difference between CRMs and SFA
:::

Check out this [short article from SelectHub](#) that outlines in more
detail the difference between CRMs and SFAs.
::::

# Step 2: Pre-approach {#sect-00003}

The pre-approach stage can best be described as a thorough analysis or
research of the potential candidate. It is in the pre-approach stage
that the sales professional will conduct a very detailed study of the
prospect, which will often include information about specific product
needs, what current brands they might be using, brand awareness, who the
decision makers are, and general knowledge of personal interests and
financial standing. The research findings are meant to help the sales
professional to find out needs and wants as well as the best way to
approach the prospect for the sales presentation.

Some of the research that sales professionals seek to review as part of
their investigation may include interviews with other clients, financial
reports, credit histories, and any sources of public information. Most
companies with a sales force and sales process will use robust customer
relationship management (CRM) databases to collect, filter, and track
prospects through the stages of the sales process. Information that is
uncovered during the pre-approach will be added to prospect records in
the CRM system.

# Step 3: Approach {#sect-00004}

Information gathered in the pre-approach helps the sales professional
during the approach phase. Utilizing the insights they have gathered
about the prospect, the sales professional seeks to contact the prospect
to build rapport and gather more information on the needs and wants of
the prospect. During this phase, it is very important for the sales
professional to create a positive impression, ask the right questions,
and begin building a relationship with the prospect.

A soft approach is generally the best strategy, as the goal is to build
the relationship and not necessarily push product. Hard-sell tactics are
often rebuffed during this early contact with the prospect. Ideally the
role of the salesperson in this early stage is to ask questions and
listen. It is through listening intently to the prospect that the
salesperson can detect the fit for the product and ultimately the best
way to sell the product. Information gathered during the approach will
often be used in the presentation stage.

# Step 4: Presentation {#sect-00005}

Once the prospect has made it through the approach stage, the sales
professional is ready to present the product to the prospect. During the
presentation stage, the goal is to showcase the features about the
product that will be of most benefit to the prospect based on the needs
uncovered during the pre-approach and approach stages. Often the
presentation may include education on the aspects of the product that
the prospect will find most beneficial to solve their problems. This is
the time for the sales professional to highlight the benefits of the
product and answer questions the prospect might have. For example,
college admissions departments work with students to showcase the best
of the university in an attempt to persuade them to enroll. Part of the
presentation process includes tours of the campus, meetings with current
students, attending classes, and experiencing campus life.

The best sales professionals are good listeners. Good listening
strategies work to build rapport and create winning strategies. When you
listen carefully to your prospects, they will tell you exactly how to
sell to them. Using information provided by the prospect, a good sales
professional will be able to turn it into a winning sale. Several
methods of sale presentation include a stimulus-response format, formula
selling, a need/satisfaction format, adaptive selling, and consultative
selling.

## Stimulus-Response Format {#sect-00006}

When a salesperson has done the research and they understand many of the
issues that might be presented by the customer, they are able to provide
a stimulus, and the customer provides a response. The skilled
salesperson is able to counter every response with a new stimulus. The
goal is to sell based on the response from the customer. To be
effective, the salesperson must follow a script, which has been
developed based on the pre-identified needs and wants of the customer.

## Formula Selling Format {#sect-00007}

Advertising has typically been dependent on the customer going through a
specific set of actions before responding. One of the most common
consumer response models is the AIDA model, which encompasses attention,
interest, desire, and action. Marketers often look to the AIDA model
when putting together advertising campaigns. The AIDA model is also used
for formula selling. The goal is for the salesperson to take the
customer through the various stages of response until they get to the
purchase of the product. The skilled sales professional will make sure
they are providing stimuli and responses for each of the stages of AIDA.

## Need/Satisfaction Format {#sect-00008}

The need/satisfaction format of selling is an approach where the sales
professional opens the sales presentation by probing the potential
customer with questions in an effort to uncover their needs. The sales
presentation is then tailored to the customer by showing how the
product/service will satisfy the customer needs.

For example, the owner of a busy café may be met with a question about
scheduling from a salesperson who sells scheduling software. The
salesperson may start with a question such as "This café is so busy; is
it difficult to schedule your staff?" Once the café owner talks about
the challenges of scheduling, the salesperson now has information they
need to custom tailor the sales presentation about scheduling software
to the specific needs identified by the café owner.

## Adaptive Selling {#sect-00009}

Adaptive selling is one of the most customer-centric sales methods
available to the sales professional. Using the adaptive selling approach
requires the sales professional to adapt their selling strategy and even
the product to meet the needs and solve the problems of the customer. To
fully utilize this approach requires that the sales professional rapidly
customize their approach to meet the needs of different customers. Many
sales professionals are taking advantage of the big data that is now
readily available to better target customers. Armed with data about what
is going on in the market, the salesperson can now adapt their
presentation with real time information.

## Consultative Selling {#sect-00010}

Perhaps this method was best exemplified in the movie *Miracle on 34th
Street.* In the movie, the Macy's Santa Claus suggests a location, other
than Macy's, where a mother can get a toy for her son. Consultative
selling makes the sales professional a consultant who develops a
relationship with the customer and takes on an advisory role to help the
customer solve their problems. Generally, the problem will get solved
through purchase of the product, but it can also be solved in various
other ways. The sales professional becomes the anchor to helping the
potential customer solve their problems.

# Step 5: Handling Objections {#sect-00011}

Preparation during the qualification, pre-approach, and approach stages
of the sale process, provide the sales professional with the information
they will need to handle objections. In many situations, seasoned sales
professionals are able to successfully present the product and answer
questions without having objections. Good research on the customer and
an understanding of how the product will help them and solve their
problems allow the sales professional to avoid objections. However, when
the customer does present an objection, the skilled sales professional
will need to be agile at handling them.

Typically, strategies for handling objections include listening,
restating the question, and responding with additional questions. Price
is generally always voiced as an objection. Knowing the common
objections and having a strategy to handle them prior to the
presentation will help advance to the close stage.

# Step 6: Closing {#sect-00012}

Asking for the order is perhaps the hardest step in the sales process
for many sales professionals. Up to the point of the close, the sales
professional has spent a tremendous amount of time and energy with the
prospect. Much of the work of the sales professional has been around
building a relationship with the prospect. Asking for the order is a
source of tremendous fear for many sales professionals because this is
the point where all of their work could unravel. What if the customer
says no? Then what?

Many sales professionals fear the possibility of rejection. They also
consider that they may get the timing wrong. However, if the sales
professional has prepared, they know that asking for the order is the
point where they make the prospect a customer. One way to eliminate the
guesswork of timing is to do a trial close by talking about things such
as financial terms or delivery of the product. The customer's response
to the trial close questions will alert the sales professional to the
prospect's readiness to purchase.

# Step 7: Follow-Up {#sect-00013}

After the order is placed, the real work begins. Upon closing a sale and
signing the prospect as a customer, the sales professional is now tasked
with onboarding the customer and ensuring that everything progresses
smoothly with the sale of the product. Because it is much more lucrative
for a company to keep current customers happy than to go out and
prospect for new customers, the follow-up is a major step in creating
lifetime customer value (LCV). Most salespeople would rather maintain
their current clients than search for new clients. The follow-up after
the sale is a critical step in getting repeat business, customer
referrals, and upsells during the next order cycle.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00014}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00015}

:::: {#rf-001 .note}
::: title
:::

1\.

"Sales Force Automation Technology and CRM: What's the Difference?,"

Sales Blog & Field Sales Management

, ForceManager, last modified February 4, 2021,
https://www.forcemanager.com/blog/sfa-vs-crm-how-to-decide/.
::::

:::: {#rf-002 .note}
::: title
:::

2\.

"CRM 101: What Is CRM?," Salesforce, accessed June 25, 2022,
https://www.salesforce.com/crm/what-is-crm/.
::::

# 

adaptive selling

an approach to personal selling in which selling behaviors are altered
during the sales interaction or across customer interactions, based on
information about the nature of the selling situation

AIDA model

the model consumers go through when becoming interested in a product.
First the product must grab their attention, then they gain interest,
they have a desire for the product, and they act to acquire the product

approach

the stage of the sales process where the salesperson makes the initial
approach to introduce the product to the customer

consultative selling

focuses on the expertise of a salesperson with problem solving

customer relationship management

the process sales personnel undertake to work with the customer to build
the relationship and move into the role of a trusted advisor

formula selling

an approach in which the sales presentation is designed to move the
customer through the stages in the decision-making process, such as get
the customer's attention, develop interest, build desire, and secure
action

need/satisfaction format

a type of customized sales presentation in which the salesperson first
identifies the prospective customer's needs and then tries to offer a
solution that satisfies those needs

pre-approach stage

the stage of the sales process where the salesperson will work to
understand the needs of the customer and begin working with them to
become a customer

presentation

the stage of the sales process where the salesperson showcases the
features about a product that will be of most benefit to the prospect
based on the needs uncovered during the pre-approach and approach stages

prospect

a potential qualified customer who has the willingness, financial
capacity, authority, and eligibility to buy the salesperson's offering

qualification

the process the salesperson undertakes to make sure the sales lead is a
good fit for the product they are selling

sales force automation

a software tool that helps organizations acquire customers

sales leads

a database of potential customers that sales professionals work to
create and develop through lead generation

selling process

includes all of the steps the salesperson will implement as they work
with the buyer to become a customer
