m00100

2b3a63cd-95ac-406c-aba7-bb33051ae642

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify the issues involved in managing a sales force. 

List the various ways a sales force can be structured.

Describe the tasks involved in sales force recruitment and selection.

Discuss key metrics that can be used to assess sales performance.

Describe the tasks involved in supervising and evaluating a sales force.

Summarize the metrics that can be used for sales force performance
evaluation.

# Issues Involved in Managing a Sales Force {#sect-00002}

A sales force can be the lifeblood of an organization's revenue cycle,
so it's important that they are incentivized to produce new clients,
maintain current clients, and generate revenue for the organization.
Proper management of the sales force includes setting goals, motivating,
incentivizing, supporting, and monitoring.

Typical issues specific to sales include motivating and challenging the
sales force. A sales force is always under pressure to meet sales
targets, often linked to revenue goals, so a manger needs to constantly
be working with their sales team to keep them motivated and hit the
targets.

Finding the right person for the job is an important role for a sales
manager. Sales managers often look for recent college graduates to fill
sales positions. In addition, sales managers may look for someone
already experienced in sales and then train them for the specific
industry and products. Whatever set of skills a company might be looking
for, finding the right mix of professionals can be challenging.

## Sales Force Management Defined {#sect-00003}

Sales force management includes a very wide range of responsibilities.
There are many tasks involved in sales force management, including the
process of hiring, training, and motivating sales staff, as well as
coordinating activities and implementing a sales strategy designed to
increase sales revenue.

## Setting Sales Force Objectives {#sect-00004}

For the sales force to be effective, they must understand what is
expected of them. Establishing a clear set of objectives conveys to the
sales force the expectation and how they will be evaluated. Sales force
objectives can be set for the entire sales force as well as individual
sales professionals. Objectives are usually set based on revenue goals,
and they should be clearly established with measurement metrics and a
time frame for completion. Typical sales force objectives include a mix
of generating new customers and working with current customers.

# Serving Existing Customers {#sect-00005}

Much of the work of a sales professional is around serving the existing
customer. It is important to keep customers satisfied. Most
organizations rely heavily on existing customers to provide good
reviews, customer referrals, repeat purchases, and upsell of existing
products. Sales professionals are expected to continue developing and
building the relationship with existing customers to ensure they are
satisfied. This can include checking on inventory, dealing with supply
issues, and educating on product application. Objectives may include how
often the sales professional is expected to keep in contact with the
existing customer.

# Developing New Customers {#sect-00006}

Growth is a key driver of most organizations, and growth comes through
new sales to existing customers and also through sales to new customers.
A sales force objective of obtaining a certain number of new customers
is common. The sales force must have a lead pipeline of prospective
customers they are constantly working to turn into customers.

# Increasing Market Share and Profit {#sect-00007}

Additional methods for companies to grow include obtaining more market
share as well as more profitable sales. When there are sales objectives
for market share, they usually focus on an increase in the proportion of
the firm's sales as compared to the total number of products the firm
sells overall in the industry.

# Enhancing Customer Satisfaction {#sect-00008}

An important element of obtaining new customers as well as getting
additional sales from existing customers is keeping customers satisfied.
Satisfaction can mean good reviews, referral business, and lifetime
customers. Objectives for customer satisfaction usually involve the
sales force working with customers and obtaining reviews and
endorsements.

# Designing the Sales Force Strategy and Structure {#sect-00009}

There are many ways to design and develop a sales force. Careful thought
to the customer is usually the best practice for establishing the right
structure. Other factors in determining the best structure involve the
company and its products. Sometimes organizations utilize all of the
methods to structure the sales force.

For example, Pfizer has a neuroscience product and structures its sales
force by product, customer type/size, and geography. The Pfizer
pharmaceutical sales representative for the neuroscience product calls
on neurologists, represents only one or two products so that they are an
expert on the efficacy and uses, and has a very tight geographical
territory, usually focused on a few zip codes depending on the number of
neurological medical practices in a given area.

## Territorial Sales Force Structure {#sect-00010}

Setting up a sales force territory is typically done based on the number
of prospects and customers as well as the size of the customer and the
potential revenue from the typical sale. The goal is to make the
territories equitable for all of the sales force. Geographic territories
are typical and take into consideration the amount of time spent in the
field and how large the coverage area may be for the sales force.

## Product Sales Force Structure {#sect-00011}

Firms typically want the sales force to be knowledge experts on the
products they represent. It is common for a company to provide the sales
force with a portfolio of products and to include continuous training on
all aspects of the products they sell. In order to provide the best
resources, companies create structure around product portfolios and have
their sales force structured according to the products they sell. For
example, in wine distribution, some sales representatives work with
restaurants, the "on-premise" segment. Other sales reps would serve
retail outlets, including supermarkets and independent wine shops.

## Customer (Market) Sales Force Structure {#sect-00012}

In addition to knowledge of the products, the sales force needs to be
knowledgeable about the customers and the industries they serve. Many
companies structure their sales force according to the industry or
customers. A company that sells products within the restaurant industry
may be structured according to quick service, fast fresh, food truck,
and fine dining.

# Determining the Size of the Sales Force {#sect-00013}

Investing in a sales force is significant for any company. Sales
professionals must be properly incentivized, and the pay and benefits
packages can be quite high for experienced and well-trained employees.
Companies must determine the number of potential customers as well as
the time to nurture prospects into customers. The size of the sales
force must be considered in relation to the complexity of the product,
the profit margins on sales, and the size and number of customers in the
markets served.

# Recruiting and Selecting Salespeople {#sect-00014}

Hiring and training a sales force is a significant process and cost for
companies. The sales manager must have a set of skill requirements and
product knowledge that the right candidate must have in order to fill
the available roles. There is significant agreement that good
salespeople all possess the traits of self-motivation, time management,
optimism, empathy, and the ability to network. Many salespeople make
themselves valuable based on the network of contacts they are able to
maintain.

Most recruiting starts with a job description detailing the requirements
and the necessary skills that are needed to do the job. Finding the
right candidates often starts through listing available job openings on
many of the digital job boards, such as Indeed, CareerBuilder, and
LinkedIn. Executive recruiting firms can also be instrumental in finding
and matching the right job candidates.

# Training Salespeople {#sect-00015}

Training of the sales force is a significant effort for most companies.
Many organizations have a formal training program and spend considerable
time and resources to keep the sales force knowledgeable on the products
and industries served. Areas of training include sales strategies and
how to sell, the products being sold, the industries served, and the
company itself.

The best training programs are a combination of classroom activities and
in-the-field training. Companies typically have their own training
programs. New hires will spend a couple of weeks to a few months in
training before they are given their own accounts and territories.
Training, however, is not only for the newly hired sales professionals.
Most companies have continuous training requirements for their sales
force. Training for existing employees often includes company processes,
information on products, and enhancing sales skills. Most top-performing
sales teams spend time training with company managers as well as other
sales professionals.

# Compensating Salespeople {#sect-00016}

Compensation of the sales force is typically focused on providing a fair
wage as well as incentivizing and motivating. Many organizations combine
a variety of compensation methods to meet both individual goals and the
overarching organizational goals.

## Commission Only {#sect-00017}

Using a commission-only compensation structure provides for the
motivation and incentive to make sales. Seasoned sales professionals
typically enjoy a higher commission or commission-only structure. They
are confident in their ability to sell the products and want to
recognize the significant compensation enjoyed by a high commission
structure on the sales they make.

The advantages of a commission-only compensation structure are that the
company is not burdened with the expense of the sales force, as it only
pays the sales professional if they have made a sale. This structure
provides incentive and motivation for the sales professional to make
sales and work hard.

The disadvantages of this structure include potential burnout of the
sales force as well as a possible situation where the sales force uses
aggressive practices to make sales.

## Salary Only {#sect-00018}

When an organization uses the sales force more as trusted, it tends to
provide a salary structure. Using salary-only compensation provides for
stability of the sales force and the inclination of the sales
professional to spend significant time with the customers and prospects.

A new salesperson at a car dealership might start on salary for a few
months while learning the business. Later, after gaining product
knowledge, developing a prospect list, and gaining the trust of the
veteran sales staff, that person might switch to commission only.

The advantages of the salary-only structure are that it gives the
organization control over the sales expense and is easy to administer.
There are, however, a few disadvantages. One of the major disadvantages
is that there is no incentive or motivation to make a sale. Another
major disadvantage is that when sales decline, the expenses remain the
same.

## Salary and Commission {#sect-00019}

Many organizations utilize a combination of salary and commission. This
allows for control of the sales force and the activities while still
providing the sales force with incentives and motivation.

The major advantage to the combination structure is that it provides a
certain amount of financial stability for the sales force while also
incentivizing them to make sales. A disadvantage to the organization is
that it is difficult to administer, and it makes the selling expense
less predictable.

## Salary and Individual Bonus {#sect-00020}

Another form of compensation is a base salary plus individual bonuses
upon meeting goals and objectives. The advantages are control over the
selling expense and incentive to meet goals and objectives established
for the sales force. The disadvantage is primarily in the administration
of the structure to make sure the bonus is sufficient to provide
motivation and incentive and to keep track of the bonus structure.

## Salary, Commission, and Bonus {#sect-00021}

This is the most complex of all of the compensation methods, as it
combines all elements: a base salary, commission based on sales, and
bonus based on goal targets. The advantages for the employee are the
security from the salary combined with an incentive through the
commission and bonus. There are two levels of incentive and motivation
to keep the sales force engaged and actively working on making sales.
The disadvantages include the complexity of managing the structure and
tracking commissions and bonuses.

# Supervising and Evaluating the Sales Force {#sect-00022}

While most sales professionals are self-motivated, they still require
supervision, and this will include methods of evaluation to make sure
the predetermined objectives have been met. Sales managers are tasked
with developing the objectives and goals as well as monitoring and
evaluating the success of the sales effort. There are a number of
methods used to supervise and evaluate.

Quantitative assessments focus on the items that can be measured. They
are less subjective and allow the sales manager to focus on the goals
and objectives set for the sales force. A quantitative assessment may
include a scale to rank activities of the sales force. For example,
Paychex may evaluate the sales force based on how many leads they have
acquired in a given month, the number of meetings with prospects, and
the number of communication touch points with existing clients.

Another key element of evaluation includes the behavioral aspects of
selling. Behavioral evaluations tend to be subjective in nature;
however, they can be very helpful in identifying the right actions for
the sales force to be effective at selling. Typically, a sales manager
may accompany a sales professional for a day. The goal of the sales
manager is to see how the sales professional handles their day,
communicates with clients, answers questions, and conducts follow-up
activities.

# Useful Metrics to Assess Sales Performance {#sect-00023}

There are many metrics utilized by sales managers to gauge the
performance of the sales force. The metrics should align with the goals
and objectives of the organization and the sales function. Ideally,
sales managers rely on metrics to provide the sales force with clear
targets to work toward.

## Sales Metrics {#sect-00024}

Sales metrics include data that serve to measure the individual
performance of the sales professional, the team as a whole, and the
company's sales performance over a period of time. Sales managers use
the data to measure and evaluate areas that are doing well and those
that need improvement.

Most sales teams have found that a few key metrics are instrumental in
evaluating the overall success of the sales efforts. Every activity of
the sales force needs to work toward making the sale. Metrics for sales
productivity look to gauge the effectiveness of the efforts. Some
typical productivity metrics include

percentage of time spent on selling activities;

percentage of time spent updating the CRM;

percentage of lead follow-up; and

percentage of leads generated.

Time is of the essence in connecting with "warm" leads, or potential
customers who have expressed interest in the product. Lead response time
measures evaluate the responsiveness of the sales force to the leads
generated. Most sales programs seek an acceptable time frame for
response. Some examples include

time to contact a new lead;

time to respond to a customer question;

time to prepare a new prospect presentation; and

time to create a proposal.

The opportunity win rate is a good measure to gauge the effectiveness of
the sales force. It is important to know how many leads the sales force
is given and how many leads become prospects. Knowing the opportunity
win rate will help to determine where the sales force might need
extended training on closing sales; it will also help to determine how
many leads are needed in order to convert to clients.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00025}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00026}

:::: {#rf-003 .note}
::: title
:::

3\.

Julie Thomas, "What Companies That Grew in 2020 Realize about Sales
Training,"

Forbes

, January 8, 2021,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbesbusinessdevelopmentcouncil/2021/01/08/what-companies-that-grew-in-2020-realize-about-sales-training.
::::

# 

commission

the compensation paid to salespeople based on a fixed formula related to
the salesperson's activity or performance

lead response time

the activity of evaluating factors through data analytics, demographics,
buyer behavior, competitor analysis, and economics

opportunity win rate

the number of sales closed divided by the total number of opportunities
created; calculates another opportunity to track sales

quantitative assessments

numbers driven and based on inputs and outputs of the sales cycle
