m00101

112d7eff-e453-4eb4-ace3-adaf4d3c06ab

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define sales promotion.

Discuss the importance of sales promotion in the promotion mix.

# Sales Promotion {#sect-00002}

Sales promotion is a promotional strategy focused on inducing sales in
the short term. Of all the promotional activities, sales promotion is
solely focused on a direct call to action to buy something. Sales
promotion can be targeted to intermediaries through a push strategy or
directly to consumers through a pull strategy. Marketers often use sales
promotion in tandem with other promotional strategies. When McDonald's
advertises, for example, "Free fries on Friday when you purchase a menu
item through the app," it is using advertising along with sales
promotion to induce consumers to use the app and to increase sales on
Fridays.

When products are at the introductory stage of the product life cycle,
sales promotion can be effective at inducing trial of a product. The
greater the competition, the more a sales promotion strategy becomes
important for getting consumers to switch or try a new or different
product. Product manufacturers often use sales promotion in-store to set
apart the brand or product at the time of purchase. As you walk past the
cheese aisle at the grocery store, you might see Sargento offering a
buy-one-get-one (BOGO) deal. This is a sales promotion geared toward
getting the customer to buy more of Sargento or possibly try Sargento
for the first time.

# Importance of Sales Promotion in the Promotion Mix {#sect-00003}

Many of the strategies in the promotion mix are informative in nature.
However, when other strategies are combined with sales promotion, there
is a direct and immediate call to action to purchase the product.
Companies needing to create sales in the short term will benefit from
sales promotion. Utilizing sales promotion is a very effective strategy
for generating trial of a product in the introductory stages of the
product life cycle (PLC).

## Spreading of Information {#sect-00004}

Sales promotion is very effective at spreading information about new
products and product modifications. Creating awareness of the brand to
new markets and customers is another effective use of sales promotion.

When MyPillow has an advertorial during Fox News and provides a code for
a reduced price of its renowned pillows, the advertorial serves to tell
new customers about the products as well as provide an incentive to
purchase the product immediately.

## Stimulation of Demand {#sect-00005}

One of the key elements to good sales promotion is that it stimulates
sales in the short term. Sales promotion gives customers an immediate
incentive to purchase a product.

Sonic Drive-In (see [\#](#)) offers half-price drinks and slushes every
day from 2:00 to 4:00 as a "happy hour" special. The use of this sales
promotion tactic does two things: first, it incentivizes consumers to
buy drinks, and second, it provides sales during the slow times of the
day.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

## Customer Satisfaction {#sect-00006}

Today's customer is presented with thousands of messages. Companies are
driven to get noticed, increase sales, and keep their customers
satisfied. Sales promotions are one method a company may use to increase
customer satisfaction. A survey from RetailMeNot "showed that coupons
can affect brain chemistry and can make customers happier." The research
concluded that an online shopper who received a \$10 coupon was 11%
happier and had 38% higher oxytocin levels than those who didn't get a
discount. Providing the occasional discount can chemically make a
customer happier, resulting in a more satisfied customer, who may spend
more in the future and may become a loyal shopper.

## Stabilization of Sales Volume {#sect-00007}

Sales promotion can also be used to help stabilize sales volume. Because
sales promotion works to incentivize purchase of a product in the short
term, companies often use this promotional tactic to drive sales and
meet targets. Typical sales promotion tactics used to increase sales
include buy-one-get-one-half-off and other specific discounts that are
available when used by a certain time. The time element provides the
company with the target for the sale, and the customer is provided with
an incentive to purchase by a certain time.

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
Cost of Customer Acquisition
:::

We often think about profitability based on the difference between what
we spend to create a product or service and the amount a customer pays
for that product or service. However, we have to remember that there are
costs to acquiring customers. In this chapter, you learned about two
promotional activities that create costs to reach customers: sales and
sales promotion.

Within the sales process, an organization pays a salesperson salary
and/or commission to make sales. This is an example of a cost to acquire
a customer. As you can imagine, we want our cost to acquire to stay low.
For example, if we sold multimillion-dollar airplanes, it would be
reasonable to spend thousands of dollars on a salesperson to make that
sale. However, if we were selling several-hundred-dollar televisions,
our cost to acquire a customer must be much lower.

Sales promotion is another promotional expense. For example, if a pizza
brand provides samples at Costco, this might encourage a customer to
purchase pizza. And if that customer keeps buying pizza, the cost of the
pizza sample was worth it for the value that the customer will bring
over the life of the relationship. Other categories of promotional costs
include advertising, public relations, social media, search, and direct
marketing.

The formula for cost of acquisition is the total cost of marketing
activities divided by number of customers acquired.

$${Cost}~{of}~{Acquistion} = \frac{{Total}~{Cost}~{of}~{Marketing}~{Activities}}{{Number}~{of}~{Customers}~{Acquired}}$$

In this formula, you will see an assumption that all customers are worth
the same amount, but as savvy marketers, we know that this is untrue.
This is why we need to use a variety of marketing metrics when
evaluating campaigns.

*Give the cost of acquisition calculation a try for yourself. What is
the cost of acquisition in the example provided below?*

  *Type of Promotion*       *Expense*     *Yield*
  ------------------------- ------------- -------------------
  Television Advertising    \$1,250,000   400,000 customers
  Catalog Mailing           \$750,000     250,000 customers
  Search Engine Marketing   \$550,000     90,000 customers
  Outdoor Activation        \$1,500,000   70,000 customers
  Ad Agency Fees            \$600,000     0 customers
  *TOTAL*                   \$4,650,000   810,000 customers

$$\$ 5.74~{per}~{customer}$$

Formula:

$$\$ 4,650,000~/~810,000$$

*What additional information do you need to determine whether the cost
of acquisition is appropriate for the product or service?*

The price of the product/service, total sales, expenses, and margins
associated with the product or service

*Let's suppose that this example is for a national bookseller. The
bookseller has an average profit per customer of \$90 over the
customer's lifetime. Would the cost per acquisition that you calculated
provide a good value for the bookseller? Why or why not?*

Yes. It is worth it to spend \$5.74 to acquire a customer worth \$90 on
average over the lifespan of the relationship;

$$\$ 90 > \$ 5.74$$
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00008}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00009}

:::: {#rf-004 .note}
::: title
:::

4\.

Roger Dooley, "Coupons: Better Than Kissing,"

Forbes

, December 21, 2012,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/rogerdooley/2012/12/21/coupons-kissing.
::::

:::: {#rf-005 .note}
::: title
:::

5\.

Min-Jee Hwang, "How to Use Pricing and Promotions to Improve Customer
Satisfaction,"

Wiser Retail Strategies

(blog), Wiser, July 13, 2017,
https://blog.wiser.com/how-to-use-pricing-and-promotions-to-improve-customer-satisfaction/.
::::
