m00102

5dac0ee8-7577-46c8-862b-683ed71c9702

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Discuss the primary types of consumer-oriented sales promotion.

Discuss the primary types of trade-oriented sales promotion.

# Consumer-Oriented Sales Promotion {#sect-00002}

Sales promotion can be categorized in two ways. The first category of
sales promotion is consumer-oriented, which focuses on the consumer
pulling the product through the marketing channels. The second category
is trade-oriented, which is intended to push the product through the
channel to the consumer.

Consumer-oriented sales promotion provides the customer with an
immediate inducement to purchase a product. The goal is to have the
consumer seek out the product and "pull it" through the marketing
channel. There are many common forms of consumer-oriented sales
promotion.

## Coupons {#sect-00003}

The goal of coupons is to reduce the price of the product and prompt the
consumer to make an immediate purchase. The major goal is to increase
sales quickly, attract repeat purchases, or try new versions of a
product. Consumers using coupons recognize the savings when they
relinquish the coupon at the time of purchase. Coupons come in many
different forms, including printed, digital, and mobile. Because a
coupon has to be redeemed to obtain the reward, manufacturers can
determine the effectiveness of the coupon offer and the method of
delivery.

The company HelloFresh sends a direct mail piece with a coupon for 16
free meals. When consumers sign up for the home delivery meal plan, this
is a great example of how a coupon might be used to create brand
awareness and acquire new customers. The direct mail might also include
a code to use online for digital application of the offer.

## Samples {#sect-00004}

Samples are most often used to induce trial of a new product. This
tactic can be very effective to increase sales volume during the early
stages of the product life cycle and to help with better distribution.
Samples can be given out in stores, at events, or through the mail. This
is an expensive form of sales promotion but can be highly effective at
inducing purchase. Costco regularly has samples within its aisles and at
the immediate point of sale as consumers are shopping. Another example
is from the 2022 SXSW conference in Austin, Texas, when Creminelli Fine
Meats distributed free mini packs of salami to showcase the company's
line of "charcuterie-grade snacking" products. The makers of White Claw
Hard Seltzer were corporate sponsors of the event; conference-goers were
treated to free samples of new flavors, such as Passion Fruit.

## Premiums {#sect-00005}

Premiums are items offered free or at a minimum cost alongside the
purchase of a product. Some of the most famous premiums include the
McDonald's Happy Meal toys and Cracker Jack ("The more you eat the more
you want") with a prize inside. Premiums are very good for attracting
new buyers and providing an incentive for customer loyalty. The use of
the Happy Meal toy created significant customer loyalty among consumers
who wanted to collect all the toys in a series.

## Contests {#sect-00006}

Contests make consumers use their skills to compete for prizes. Using
contests allows customers to engage with products and become invested in
the process of trying to win something of value. Companies often use
contests in coordination with other sales promotion tactics, such as
coupons. Doritos regularly includes a contest as part of its
advertising. Pepperidge Farm challenged consumers to #GoForTheHandful
and create an Instagram duet with pro basketball player Boban
Marjanović. The goal was to see if consumers could hold more Goldfish
crackers in their tiny hands compared to the large hands of the pro
basketball player. Winners were treated to Goldfish for a year and the
title of Official Goldfish Spokeshand. Contests are based on analytical
or creative skills.

## Sweepstakes {#sect-00007}

Where contests are based on skill, sweepstakes are based on chance.
Companies use sweepstakes in order to increase sales volume in the short
term. Sweepstakes ask contestants to submit their names for inclusion in
a drawing for prizes. Publishers Clearing House conducts one of the most
well-known sweepstakes. The company ultimately wants consumers to order
magazines; however, the purchase of a magazine is not necessary to enter
and win the \$1 million cash prize. However, Publishers Clearing House
is able to add to its mailing list when consumers enter to win.

## Loyalty Programs {#sect-00008}

Loyalty programs have increased in popularity. Most of today's loyalty
programs are tied to a mobile app. The attractiveness of loyalty
programs is that when consumers spend, they get points toward something
free. For example, Wired Coffee Bar offers consumers \$5 off of a
product in-store when they spend \$50.

## Point-of-Purchase Displays {#sect-00009}

Point-of-purchase displays have been a hallmark in store aisles for
decades. The point-of-purchase display allows manufacturers to showcase
their products in a way that stands out from all the other products in
the store. Companies typically utilize the point-of-purchase promotion
method for new products that are being introduced to the market. Some
common forms of point-of-purchase presentations include outdoor signs,
window displays, countertop containers, display racks, and self-serve
cartons. The key to good point-of-purchase is having a display that
attracts customers and enhances the brand image of the product being
offered.

## Rebates {#sect-00010}

Rebates provide some type of reimbursement of the cost of a product when
the consumer completes certain information about the time, place, and
price of the product purchased. Typically, the consumer must submit the
rebate form by a certain date and must include receipts or bar codes
from the purchase. Rebates usually induce the consumer to buy the
product as it is being offered at a perceived cheaper price. Consumers
often fail to submit the required materials to receive the rebate, as
they might see the process as too laborious.

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
Domino's
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Companies use sales promotion to generate more sales and to promote
their brands. Setting up special days for certain products and causes
can help bring focus and attention as well as boost sales or donations
in the short term. For example, days such as National Coffee Day,
National Pet Adoption Day, and National Pizza Day put a spotlight on the
product or cause and can work to create a news story, which helps to
generate consumer interest.

During National Pizza Day, companies selling pizza will run various
promotions geared toward selling more pizza and getting consumers across
the country to eat pizza. While Domino's Pizza regularly runs discounts
and promotions, most of them are "deals" that consumers can use on a
regular basis (see [\#](#)). Pizza delivery companies regularly utilize
sales promotion strategies as a way to deal with the highly competitive
nature of the pizza delivery industry.

For National Pizza Day 2022, Domino's, a company known for fast pizza
delivery, ran an unusual sales promotion offering cash back if consumers
picked up their pizza instead of having it delivered. For a limited
time, Domino's, the world's largest pizza chain, offered to give
consumers back \$3 when they opted to pick up their pizza instead of
having it delivered. "The \$3 coupon was redeemable the following week
on another carryout order of \$5 or more before tax and gratuity."
::::

# Trade-Oriented Sales Promotion {#sect-00011}

Trade-oriented sales promotion is focused on the channel intermediaries:
the wholesalers and retailers. The goal is for the intermediary to be
incentivized to push the product to the consumer.

## Allowances and Discounts {#sect-00012}

Manufacturers provide the retailers or wholesalers with allowances to
pass along in the form of price breaks to the end customer. For example,
Ford Motor Company might offer a \$3,000 trade-in allowance for the new
F-150. This is an incentive to come into the dealership and buy the
F-150. The dealer has the allowance from Ford and is able to pass the
savings to the consumer as an incentive to come in and buy a new truck.

## Cooperative Advertising {#sect-00013}

Advertising can be expensive for retailers. Typically, they advertise
products they have in stock in an effort to induce consumers to come in
and make a purchase. Cooperative advertising is a way for manufacturers
to help with the cost of the advertising, in exchange for the retailer
to advertise the products produced by the manufacturer. When supermarket
chain Publix advertises Boar's Head meats and cheeses, Publix is using
cooperative advertising from Boar's Head to run the ads featuring Boar's
Head products.

## Cash Bonuses {#sect-00014}

Some manufacturers provide bonus cash as an incentive for the retail
sales associates to push the manufacturers' products. Bonuses can be
given to the sales associate who sells the most or to the store that is
the highest sales producer. It is then up to the store to determine how
best to use the cash bonus.

## Credit Terms {#sect-00015}

One way for manufacturers to help the retailers and wholesalers who sell
their products is to provide them with favorable credit terms. Often
these terms allow the wholesaler or retailer to sell the products long
before actually having to pay for the product.

## Dealer Conferences {#sect-00016}

When companies have dealers who distribute their products, they want to
incentivize the dealer sales force to sell the product. Additionally,
the dealer conferences are a good method of training and educating
dealers to work with customers and ultimately sell the product to them.

## Push Incentives {#sect-00017}

Push incentives work to create demand for a product through discounts
that retailers pass on to customers. In the mobile phone industry, Apple
may provide a discount on phones through one of its retail partners in
an effort to encourage buyers to choose the iPhone through the
distributor. Push strategies focus on selling directly to the customer.
Typical tactics include point-of-sale displays and direct approaches
from the retail store sales professionals to the customers.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00018}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00019}

:::: {#rf-006 .note}
::: title
:::

6\.

Olivia Cruz, "Creminelli Works with Keep Austin Fed for an Upgraded
Snack Experience," News, SXSW Conference & Festivals, February 22, 2022,
https://www.sxsw.com/news/2022/creminelli-works-with-keep-austin-fed-for-an-upgraded-snack-experience/.
::::

:::: {#rf-007 .note}
::: title
:::

7\.

Tom Huddleston Jr., "How the 'McMillions' Scammers Rigged McDonald's
Monopoly Game and Stole \$24 Million," Make It, CNBC, February 9, 2020,
https://www.cnbc.com/2020/02/07/how-mcmillions-scam-rigged-the-mcdonalds-monopoly-game.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-008 .note}
::: title
:::

8\.

Jessica Miller, "9 Examples of Brands Crushing Social Media Contests in
2021," ShortStack, Pancake Laboratories, June 22, 2021,
https://www.shortstack.com/blog/9-examples-of-brands-crushing-social-media-contests-in-2021/.
::::

:::: {#rf-009 .note}
::: title
:::

9\.

Amanda Breen, "It's National Pizza Day. Grab the Hottest Deals from
Domino's, Papa John's, Pizza Hut and More,"

Entrepreneur

, February 9, 2022, https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/417720.
::::

:::: {#rf-010 .note}
::: title
:::

10\.

"2022 F-150 Pricing and Incentives," Ford, accessed May 10, 2022,
https://www.ford.com/trucks/f150/pricing-and-incentives/.
::::

# 

contest

a marketing or consumer sales promotion technique that involves
collection, matching, or use of skill to complete a project or activity
with the goal of a prize or reward for the player

cooperative advertising

an approach to paying for local advertising or retail advertising
whereby the details are handled by a local retail store but is partly or
fully paid for by a national manufacturer whose product is featured in
the ad

coupon

a printed certificate entitling the bearer to a stated price reduction
or special value on a specific product

credit terms

credit terms of the agreement between the buyer and seller with length
of time and payments to be made

loyalty programs

a form of promotion focused on repeat purchases and frequently attached
to a sales receipt, punch card, or stamp card

point-of-purchase displays

displays that allow manufacturers to showcase their products in a way
that stands out from all the other products in the store

premiums

a promotional tool that is often defined in three forms: merchandise
offered at a lower price or free; an item of value, other than the
product; souvenir merchandise

rebates

a form of promotion that rewards consumers for sending information to
the company

sales promotion

a short-term way of enticing the consumer to purchase a product or
service

samples

providing consumers with a free sample of a product is a form of
promotion

sweepstakes

a marketing or consumer sales promotion that involves the offering of
prizes to participants, where winners are selected by chance and no
consideration is required
