m00103

7fac3a68-99f5-4fac-ae66-3ae1ebcd9677

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Discuss the ethical issues that may arise in personal selling. 

Discuss the ethical issues that may arise in sales promotion.

# Ethical Issues in Personal Selling {#sect-00002}

The goal of sales is to create customer loyalty and repeat purchases.
Developing the relationship with the customer is best done through
honesty and integrity. Sales should always be conducted with a long-term
goal of developing a lifetime customer and not just one sale.

However, with sales goals as the driving force behind the sales
activities, the sales force can be pressured into practices that might
be counter to building customer loyalty. Without proper regulation and a
code of ethics, sales efforts can run afoul of ethical rules. Good sales
managers seek to have control features built in to prevent the
temptation to have a climate of dishonesty.

Ethical issues that can arise within the sales function of a company
include dishonest claims about a product, slanderous comments about the
competition, padding of company expense accounts and/or misuse of the
expense account, artificially inflating sales data to meet goals and
bonuses, and bribes and kickbacks.

Sales professionals are typically self-starters who are out in the field
working with their customers. In a sales role, companies provide the
sales professionals expense accounts and credit cards as a way to work
with and build relationships with clients. Without close supervision and
company policies and guidelines, the sales professional can be tempted
to participate in unethical practices. If a code of conduct is not
present, it is often hard to resist the temptations. Some of the most
common practices and temptations include misuse of the company credit
card, inflating sales to reach goals, and receiving kickbacks.

## Misuse of Company Credit Cards or Expense Accounts {#sect-00003}

Misuse of company credit cards and expense accounts can happen with any
employee, but given the solitary nature of the sales professional, it is
typically prone to happen more often with them. Because the work of the
sales professional is fairly independent from the rest of the
organization, it can create situations where there isn't enough
accountability. Misuse can happen through double billing, padding the
expense account, or overcharging for expensed items.

To handle issues of expense misuse, it is best to have policies and
procedures in place along with a record of accounting for expenses and
providing receipts for all expensed items.

## Inflating Sales Data {#sect-00004}

Because sales professionals are often given sales targets and
expectations to meet the targets, they are at risk for finding methods
of inflating their sales numbers to meet the targets. If the sales
professional gets behind or feels pressure to meet goals, it can be
appealing to find methods of showing goal achievement. The method of
inflating sales can also be termed channel stuffing. This practice
happens when a company forces more products through the distribution
channel than the channel is actually capable of selling.

When the sales organization calculates the sales targets based on
shipments of products, the method of channel stuffing helps to meet the
targets in the short term. However, long-term sales targets are
adversely affected, especially if the channel partners return the
products.

An example of how this might happen can be explained through a company
that sells over-the-counter medicines. If it has products with an
expiration date in a few months, it may ship all of the products with
the near-term expiration date. When the products don't sell within the
expiration time frame, the products are shipped back for a return. The
sales in the short term where high, and the targets were met. However,
in the long-term, the company is faced with a large shipment of returned
product.

In 2016, in an effort to meet sales goals and targets, Wells Fargo
employees created millions of fraudulent savings and checking accounts
for clients without their consent. Regulatory agencies such as the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) penalized the company and
fined it \$185 million for the illegal activity.

## Accepting Kickbacks {#sect-00005}

Another unethical practice is when sales professionals accept kickbacks.
There are many forms of kickbacks. Companies that deal internationally
are often at the biggest risk for kickbacks, as it is common practice in
some countries. Sales professionals that have long-term relationships
can be tempted to take advantage of the situation, particularly if both
sides profit from the scheme. There are many types of kickback schemes.
Primarily a kickback scheme involves two people who work together to
change the pricing structure, and in turn they both generally pocket
some profit from the sale. Under the 1977 Foreign Corrupt Practices Act
(FCPA), it is unlawful to pay or promise to pay another person for the
purpose of retaining their business.

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
Tentree
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Tentree is a sustainable clothing brand. Like many online stores and
clothing brands, it regularly runs promotions, including a percent off
of the purchase price when you sign up for their newsletter. But along
with the typical consumer-oriented promotions, Tentree also plants 10
trees for every purchase (see [\#](#)).

According to Tentree's Facebook page, "We believe that big change starts
small. Small as in bringing your reusable tote to the grocery store,
getting your coffee refilled in a thermos, and choosing to wear
sustainably made T-shirts. These small choices add up (trust us, we've
done the math), and we're here to celebrate each and every one of them.
By planting 10 trees for every purchase, we hope to make big change
accessible to everybody and show the lasting impact that one small
choice can have."

So far, the company has planted over 81 million trees. The clothing it
manufactures and sells is designed to have a very small environmental
impact. And consumers are incentivized to purchase from Tentree because
for every item purchased, the company plants 10 trees. Tentree has a
goal that customers are pushing to reach---1 billion trees planted by
2030. Its earth-first philosophy is at the heart of every garment it
sells.
::::

# Ethical Issues in Sales Promotions {#sect-00006}

When it comes to sales promotions, many ethical issues can arise. One of
the most well-known issues with sales promotion happened with a popular
McDonald's game (see [\#](#)). For years, McDonald's ran its Monopoly
game as a method to increase the consumer purchase of meals along with
Monopoly game pieces that could net customers winnings from the
fast-food giant. Not only was the game popular with customers, but it
did exactly what the sales promotion was supposed to do: it increased
sales. Unfortunately, the head of security for the company that ran the
promotion and printed the game pieces took out all the winning game
pieces in a scam worth \$24 million.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

## Hidden Fees {#sect-00007}

One of the most common issues with ethics in sales promotion is in
hidden fees that might be tacked on to the promotion. The travel and
hospitality industry can be an example of the hidden fees often found in
the fine print for the unwary customer looking for a "deal." An airline
might have advertised prices, but upon booking, the traveler may realize
the baggage and airport fees make the price higher than other advertised
rates. This can also be a common practice with hotels and resorts. The
advertised price may look appealing, and the sales promotion may seem
like a good deal, but by the time resort fees are tacked on to the
price, the promotional discount isn't as attractive.

## Ambiguous Terms and Conditions {#sect-00008}

Legal documents have long been considered tricky to maneuver. A company
may provide the terms and conditions and a link to click or simply
acknowledge that you have read through the 15,000-word document for
understanding. But does anybody really read the documents? Do consumers
really understand what they are reading and agreeing to? Most likely,
the legal jargon has gone unread, and the customer is typically unaware
of what they have agreed to. However, it is in the best interest of the
company to look out for the best interests of their customers. If the
end goal is long-term customer satisfaction, all of the work of the
company should be around making sure the customer is satisfied.
Providing ambiguous terms and conditions does nothing to really protect
the customer relationship.

#  {#sect-00009}

This chapter covers personal selling and promotions, both integral
components of marketing. Personal selling is defined as communication
between a buyer and a seller and can be customized based on the product
or service. Much of personal selling is enhanced when the salesperson
engages in relationship development to build loyalty.

Personal selling involves inside and outside order takers and their
primary responsibility to create a relationship with the buyer. Consider
inside order takers as the clerks employed by a company to assist the
customer and complete the final sale. Outside order takers are out
making calls on customers and delivering inventory. Order getters are
the highly trained salespeople, and missionary salespeople are the ones
that facilitate experiences such as samples in the store. A technical
salesperson is one that has extensive product knowledge that they use to
present a product.

Personal selling is broken down into steps, It begins with identifying a
qualified customer or prospecting; from this point leads are identified.
This is then followed by an approach, a presentation, handling
objections, closing, and asking for the order. There are many components
involved in each step based on the product/service, customer, timing,
and ability of the salesperson to close the sale. The final step is the
follow-up.

Sales force management was covered, including the definition, purpose,
and construction of compensation packages. Assessment of performance,
using sales performance metrics for quantitative assessment, and
qualitative goals are important functions of sale management.

The final section discusses promotion, which is a form of marketing
communication that is used to inform target audiences of a good,
service, brand, or issue. Considered a basic element of the marketing
mix, promotion includes various tactics that encourage purchase.
Examples include coupons, sweepstakes, rebates, premiums, special
packaging, cause-related marketing, and licensing. Loyalty programs are
increasingly used to build customer loyalty and repeat sales while at
the same time generating valuable consumer information.

Additional incentives include push incentives, which cover a marketer's
effort and expenditure to influence channel members stocking and
promotional efforts. Pull incentives, on the other hand, cover a
marketer's effort and expenditure to influence consumer and customer
demand and preference for the marketer products, using advertising,
coupons, and other forms of promotion.

Finally, ethical issues with personal selling and promotions were
discussed. Fraud and misuse of funds for sales personnel can be closely
monitored using software developed to track this information. With
promotions, hidden fees, which are one-time add-ons that may not be
fully disclosed to the consumer, will carry additional unfair costs.
Where contracts are concerned, ambiguous terms and conditions are
considered problematic, and customers as well as marketers should be
aware and avoid these issues.

#  {#sect-00010}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00011}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00012}

Consider the concept of personal selling, and apply it to yourself. What
information would you need? How would you go about crafting your
message? First, gather the facts that you would like someone to know
about you, and create a list. Next, craft the basic "elevator pitch"
introduction (that is, you only have an elevator ride to tell someone
your unique value). What would that pitch include?

Next, make a list of the situations where you might need an introduction
(sales pitch) that is longer and contains more detail. Consider a job
interview (much of this information should be on your resume), joining a
club or professional organization, or volunteering. Each of these
situations calls for slightly different information.

Create several different personal selling scripts for yourself, and have
someone you know read them and provide feedback. Consider their
feedback, and revise as you see fit. If requested, submit your scripts
to your instructor.

#  {#sect-00013}

We are surrounded by personal selling encounters: cell phone, insurance,
services in a bank, restaurant, and the list goes on. Pick a service
that you would like to learn more about. Now find a person that holds
the job of personally selling that service/product. Reach out to them;
you can call, walk into a business, or make an appointment, any way that
you choose. Introduce yourself, and tell them you are a student and
would like to ask some questions.

Start with simple information. What does the job entail?

How did they get the job? How long have they been doing personal
selling?

Do they enjoy what they do? What are the best parts and the worst parts
of the job?

Do they think that there are skills that are needed to do the job well?
If they do, what are they?

Can they discuss the compensation structure (they might hesitate, but
explain you do not need specifics, just general information)?

Do they have the opportunity to move up into management if they would
like?

Add any additional questions, or ask for clarification of something that
you do not understand. End with thanking them for their time.

This exercise should provide you with firsthand information about this
job; you can always choose another person that is in a totally different
service/product category to compare the details of the job.

#  {#sect-00014}

## Cutco {#sect-00015}

In 1949, Cutco began manufacturing knives in Olean, New York. At the
time, Cutco was making products for Wear-Ever Aluminum, a division of
Alcoa. In 1982, the company went through a management buyout that made
it a private company. The Cutco name was derived from the time under
Alcoa, when it existed as the Cooking Utensil Company.

For the past 70 years, Cutco has been a family business that prides
itself on being made in America. The company has a deep-rooted
commitment to providing American jobs. Through quality of craftsmanship,
the Cutco products are an American staple in many kitchens, and they are
the reliable cookware of choice for many home cooks.

Through its commitment to service and quality, Cutco has one of the
leading guarantees in the industry. All Cutco products are backed by The
Forever Guarantee. No matter how the consumer acquired the
product---self purchase or gift---the products come with a lifetime
performance guarantee, which includes free sharpening. If at any time
the customer is not satisfied with the performance, Cutco will correct
or replace the product. Because Cutco relies on lifetime customers and
word-of-mouth referrals, its primary responsibility is to customer
satisfaction.

While Cutco has 15 retail stores in the United States, it has long
relied on its sales force through Vector Marketing. For years, Vector
has hired and mentored a mostly collegiate sales force. In fact, 85
percent of the Vector sales force is comprised of college students.

Vector Marketing is a single-level direct sales company, and it sells
only Cutco. The relationship between Vector and Cutco dates back to
1985. Early in the 1980s, Vector Marketing was an independent seller of
Cutco. Because of Vector's success, Cutco bought it to replicate the
success it was having with Cutco's product.

The Vector Marketing home office is in Olean, New York---by its parent,
Cutco. It also operates 250 independent locations throughout the United
States, Canada, and Puerto Rico. However, during its busy summer months,
when students everywhere are working to earn money for college, Vector
Marketing has over 300 temporary locations.

Because of the weekly pay, flexible schedules, and superior sales
training, tens of thousands of college students have experienced the joy
of cutting a penny with the kitchen shears or slicing through a piece of
extra-thick rope courtesy of the sharp Cutco blades. Hundreds of
thousands of family kitchens across North America have watched the sales
demonstration, asked good questions, provided referrals, and purchased a
set of Cutco knives and kitchen accessories.

Vector Marketing works hard to recruit, educate, train, and incentivize
its sales force. The hardworking Vector Marketing sales representatives
know that up for grabs is a total of \$40,000 to full-time undergraduate
students who sell the most---the top 50 students get this award every
summer. Vector also gives a guaranteed base pay and even pays the
student for the appointment, regardless of whether they make the sale.
The company doesn't want a reputation for high-pressure sales although
they do pay commissions. Vector Marketing and Cutco realize only
satisfied customers are repeat and referral customers.

When the Vector Marketing sales representative calls to set up the
appointment, they courteously ask about when the customer can view the
Cutco presentation. When you are in the presentation, the sales
representative will go through a carefully scripted and rehearsed
presentation, which will take you through the features and the related
customer benefits afforded with ownership of your Cutco blades.

Throughout the presentation, the potential customer is asked if they
have questions and, further, what they think of the various Cutco knives
and accessories they have been shown. At the end of the presentation,
the potential customer is intentionally asked which pieces they are
going to buy, and they are encouraged to make the purchase by being
offered an additional incentive Cutco tool as a gift with purchase.

Most of the prescreened customers have come to the Vector Marketing
representative by way of a close friend or family member. Not only is
Cutco an undisputed superior product with a lifetime guarantee, but the
quality of the link from the customer back to the sales representative
helps to solidify the sale. Saying no is very difficult. Almost all
objections have already been eradicated.

After the presentation is over, the order has been placed, and the sales
representative is closing up the meeting, they ask for 10 referrals. All
good sales representatives know that the best customer is a
word-of-mouth referral.

Check out [the Cutco website](#) and [the Vector Marketing website](#).

## Case Questions {#sect-00016}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00017}

:::: {#rf-011 .note}
::: title
:::

11\.

"Wells Fargo Agrees to Pay \$3 Billion to Resolve Criminal and Civil
Investigations into Sales Practices Involving the Opening of Millions of
Accounts without Customer Authorization," Office of Public Affairs,
United States Department of Justice, February 21, 2020,
https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/wells-fargo-agrees-pay-3-billion-resolve-criminal-and-civil-investigations-sales-practices.
::::

:::: {#rf-012 .note}
::: title
:::

12\.

"About," Tentree, accessed June 25, 2022,
https://www.tentree.com/pages/about.
::::

:::: {#rf-013 .note}
::: title
:::

13\.

Tentree, "Tentree Pledges to Plant One Billion Trees by 2030 in Support
of 1t.org," News Releases, Cision, January 22, 2021,
https://www.newswire.ca/news-releases/tentree-pledges-to-plant-one-billion-trees-by-2030-in-support-of-1t-org-819565992.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-014 .note}
::: title
:::

14\.

Huddleston, "How the 'McMillions' Scammers."
::::

:::: {#rf-015 .note}
::: title
:::

15\.

"American-Made Knives. Guaranteed Forever," Cutco Corporation,
https://www.cutco.com/products/american-made.jsp
::::

:::: {#rf-016 .note}
::: title
:::

16\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-017 .note}
::: title
:::

17\.

"Who We Are," Vector Marketing Corporation,
https://www.vectormarketing.com/who-we-are/#:\~:text=Vector%20Marketing%20is%20a%20single,independent%20sellers%20of%20CUTCO%C2%AE.
::::

# 

ambiguous terms and conditions

when a contract is unclear and misleading

hidden fees

also called undisclosed fees and are fees that are not made known to the
buyer

kickbacks

illegal payment for preferential or improper service
