m00014

94f7f40c-a26d-44ba-9678-3cd46526371e

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Frito-Lay, the producer of Doritos, Lay's, and Cheetos, is a \$13
billion business division of PepsiCo. If you're a snack food fan, you
might have noticed how Frito-Lay seems to constantly come up with new
flavors for its chips---dill pickle, Chesapeake Bay Crab Spice, Chile
Limón, and more. You might picture nutritionists and scientists working
in labs, trying recipe after recipe in order to come up with a winner.
But Frito-Lay has a unique way of including customers in its strategic
decision-making process.

The company crowdsources its new flavors through a contest called "Do Us
a Flavor," in which it asks customers to submit ideas for flavors they'd
like Lay's to develop. The company then selects the three best entries
and awards a cash prize to the winners.

For example, Frito-Lay's "Turn Up the Flavor" contest resulted in three
limited-time flavors inspired by three different music genres: hip-hop,
pop, and rock. To pique interest in the content, Frito-Lay teamed up
with singer/songwriter Bebe Rexha, who wrote the theme song for the
campaign, and the company included a unique code for the new chip
packets so that buyers could unlock Rexha's new tracks.

:::: {#note-00005 .note}
::: title
Lay's Commercial
:::

Check out the Lay's Turn Up the Flavor commercial with Bebe Rexha.

[YouTube Video](#)
::::

# Endnotes {#sect-00001}

:::: {#rf-001 .note}
::: title
:::

1\.

"About Us," Contact Frito-Lay, PepsiCo, accessed June 5, 2022,
https://contact.pepsico.com/fritolay/about-us.
::::

:::: {#rf-002 .note}
::: title
:::

2\.

Werner Geyser, "10 of the Best Marketing Strategy Examples to Power Your
Campaigns," Influencer Marketing Hub, updated August 1, 2022,
https://influencermarketinghub.com/marketing-strategy-examples/.
::::

:::: {#rf-003 .note}
::: title
:::

3\.

Geyser, "Best Marketing Strategy Examples."
::::

:::: {#rf-004 .note}
::: title
:::

4\.

Ibid.
::::
