m00015

975113ad-46c1-44dc-8f12-8541407e9926

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define strategic planning and list the steps in the strategic planning
process.

Write an effective vision statement and mission statement.

Describe the role of company values.

Perform a gap analysis.

Write SMART objectives and goals.

Summarize ways to monitor progress of the strategic plan.

# Strategic Planning Defined {#sect-00002}

Let's start with a simplified definition of strategy and then move on
from there. Many if not most of you have watched a football game, either
live or on TV. Perhaps you're a fan of a particular team or you'll watch
the Super Bowl (perhaps just to see the commercials). Every football
coach knows that you don't enter a game without a game plan---the
process of taking plays out of the playbook and putting them into a game
plan for a specific opponent. This isn't an easy task. The coaching
staff has to consider the skills and experience of the players on the
team as well as the strengths---and weaknesses---of the opposing team,
and they will develop the plays that they feel will best neutralize the
strengths of the opposing team while taking advantage of the strengths
of their own players.

That football game plan is a great analogy for a business's overall
strategy---the plans, actions, objectives, and goals that outline how
the business is going to compete in its chosen markets given its
portfolio of products or services. In marketing, a portfolio is a
collection or listing of all the goods and services that a company sells
to customers.

Distinctions are often made between corporate-level strategy,
business-level strategy, and functional strategy, so let's briefly
define them here. Corporate-level strategy covers the entire business in
a complex organization where there are multiple businesses, divisions,
or operating units (sometimes called strategic business units, or SBUs).
Corporate-level strategies are formulated and implemented by upper
management. Business-level strategy is the strategic plan created for a
single business or operating unit, and these plans are generally
developed by middle management to support the corporate-level strategy.
Corporate-level and business-level strategies lead to the development of
functional strategy, which is the plan to achieve the corporate- and
business-level objectives in functional areas such as human resources,
marketing, and production.

People say a picture is worth a thousand words, so take a look at how
this breaks down in [\#](#).

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Many organizations have only a single product line, market focus, or
business, so they will require only a business-level strategy. However,
with larger organizations, it can be important to break the overall
business into smaller, more manageable strategic business units to
maintain an overall focus on the business as a whole and pull the
business-level strategies into a cohesive whole.

Consider, for example, Procter & Gamble. The producer of such diverse
products as diapers, Tide detergent, and Oral-B toothpaste has five
industry-based strategic business units---baby, feminine, and family
care; beauty; health care; grooming; and fabric and home care, family
care, and new ventures. Each of these SBUs has its own chief executive
officer and functions essentially as a standalone business under the
corporate "umbrella."

When you consider the complexities of the diverse markets Procter &
Gamble serves, this makes sense. Competing in the oral care market is
vastly different than competing in baby products, so separate SBUs
require separate strategic plans.

# Steps in the Strategic Planning Process {#sect-00003}

There are many variations of the strategic planning process---almost as
many as there are publications on strategic planning. For our purposes
in this textbook, we're going to use the five-step process outlined in
[\#](#). Keep in mind, however, that the process may be a little
different for some organizations depending on the stage of their
products in the product life cycle (which we'll learn more about in
[Products: Consumer Offerings](#)), the maturity of the industry in
which the business participates, how competitive the marketplace is, and
other factors.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

These elements will all be defined in more detail in the sections that
follow.

## Step One: The Vision Statement: Where Do We See the Business Going? {#sect-00004}

The strategic planning process begins with a solid understanding of what
the organization is trying to create---that is, its vision statement. A
vision statement is forward-looking and is intended to create a mental
image of what the organization wants to achieve in the longer term.
Vision statements should be both inspirational and aspirational.

Let's look at some vision statements from companies with which you might
be familiar so you'll see how this works:

Amazon

: "Our vision is to be earth's most customer-centric company; to build a
place where people can come to find and discover anything they might
want to buy online"

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Volkswagen

: "To make this world a mobile, sustainable place with access to all the
citizens"

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Fujitsu

: "Understanding you better---serving you best"

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

:::: {#note-00005 .note}
::: title
Vision Statement
:::

For more information on how to write a vision statement, take a look at
this brief video from RapidStart Leadership.

[How to Write an Inspiring Vision Statement](#)
::::

## Step Two: The Mission Statement: Why Does the Business Exist? {#sect-00005}

Now that the vision statement is complete, it's time to tackle the
mission statement, which quite simply answers the question, Why does the
company exist? The mission statement of an organization sums up in one
to three sentences what the company does, who it serves, and what
differentiates it from its competitors. Whereas the vision statement
provided the destination (i.e., Where is the business going?), the
mission statement provides the guideposts for the business to get there.

Mission statements serve two purposes. First, a well-written mission
statement helps employees remain focused on the aims of the business.
Second, it encourages them to discover ways of moving toward increasing
their productivity in order to achieve company goals. Mission statements
aren't just for internal use, however. Prospective investors also often
refer to a company's mission statement to see if their values align with
those of the company. Once again, let's bring this definition to life by
including a few mission statements from well-known companies:

BMW

: "The BMW Group is the world's leading provider of premium products and
premium services for individual mobility"

:::: {#note-00006 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Tesla

: "To accelerate the advent of sustainable transport by bringing
compelling mass-market electric cars to market as soon as possible"

:::: {#note-00007 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Apple

: "To bring the best personal computing products and support to
students, educators, designers, scientists, engineers, businesspersons
and consumers in over 140 countries around the world"

:::: {#note-00008 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

There are also two types of mission statements: customer oriented or
product oriented. What's the difference? A customer-oriented mission
statement defines the business in terms of how it intends to provide
solutions to customer needs. As examples, take a look at some of these
customer-oriented mission statements:

IKEA

: "To offer a wide range of well-designed, functional home furnishing
products at prices so low that as many people as possible will be able
to afford them"

:::: {#note-00009 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Netflix

: "To entertain the world"

:::: {#note-00010 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

The other type of mission statement is a product-oriented one. With a
product-oriented mission statement, the focus is on the offering itself
rather than the needs of customers. Again, look at a couple of examples
of product-oriented mission statements so you can see the difference
between these mission statements and the customer-oriented mission
statements shown above:

eBay

: "To be the world's favorite destination for discovering great value
and unique selection"

:::: {#note-00011 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Genentech

: "To develop drugs to address significant unmet medical needs"

:::: {#note-00012 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

:::: {#note-00013 .note}
::: title
Mission Statement
:::

For more information on how to write an effective mission statement,
check out this brief video from OnStrategy.

[How to Write a Mission Statement](#)

Then watch this video from Entrepreneur.

[How to Write a Great Mission Statement](#)
::::

## Step Three: Perform a Gap Analysis {#sect-00006}

Before we get into the specifics of how to perform a gap analysis, let's
define it. Simply put, a gap analysis is an internal analysis of the
company or organization to identify and review any inherent deficiencies
that may hinder its ability to meet its goals. In other words, a gap
analysis determines what factors in the organization may be causing it
to underperform.

A gap analysis answers the following questions:

Where are we now?

Where would we like to be?

What's stopping us from getting there?

A gap analysis as part of the strategic planning process is a way to
determine where the "soft spots" are and where adjustments need to be
made before setting a course of action.

There are four steps to completion of a gap analysis. Let's take a look:

Step 1: Identify the current state of the business, organization, or
department.

Let's use an example of a company that wants to increase market share of
its product line. To date, current growth is sluggish, averaging only 5
percent per year.

:::: {#note-00014 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Step 2: Identify where you want to be.

"Where you want to be" may be identified by using different terms---the
desired state, the future target, or a stretch goal. It stands to reason
that you'll want to consider your current state (from Step 1) and where
you want to be in a reasonable time frame. Do you want to increase
market share by 10 percent within the first year? Do you want to
increase market share by 25 percent within the first three years?
Because strategic plans often go out three to five years, your "where
you want to be" can be lengthy as well.

:::: {#note-00015 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Step 3: Identify the gaps.

At this point in your gap analysis, you've identified where your
organization current is and where it wants to be. Now it's time to
identify how you're going to bridge that gap. This step involves
figuring out what those gaps are. Is market share suffering because a
new competitor introduced a similar but lower-priced product into the
market? Is your pricing too high given production capabilities and
costs? Has the advertising campaign introduced last year lost its
sizzle, or worse yet, did your most recent advertising campaign flop?

:::: {#note-00016 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Step 4: Devise improvements to close the gaps.

It's time to determine the proper course of action to close the gap,
keeping in mind the cost of implementation for each solution.

:::: {#note-00017 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

This is where the rubber hits the road, so to speak, because ideas are
easy; it's the execution of those ideas that becomes challenging. An
effective gap analysis not only identifies the problems (i.e., gaps) but
also sets forth what needs to happen in specific terms to close those
gaps. Will a new advertising campaign boost market share? Do we need to
hire a new advertising agency? And what will a new advertising campaign
cost? Are there cost-cutting measures that can be taken to reduce
manufacturing costs, thereby reducing the product's cost to consumers?

## Step Four: Establish Objectives and Goals {#sect-00007}

With the mission and vision statement in place, along with a candid view
of the organization through gap analysis, we can now define the goals
and objectives for the organization. Goals and objectives are a critical
part of every organization, particularly in the strategic planning
process. When written effectively, these goals provide a sense of
direction and a clearer focus. It's these goals that give the
organization a target at which it can aim, so to speak.

But before we go further, let's differentiate between goals and
objectives. Both terms refer to desired outcomes that the organization
wants to achieve, but that's where the similarity ends. Goals are
statements of desired outcomes that are expected to be achieved over a
longer period of time, typically three to five years. Goals are broad
statements of the desired results; they do not describe the methods that
will be utilized in order to achieve those results. For example, common
business goals may include increasing revenue or market share or
reducing the company's carbon footprint.

On the other hand, objectives are "action items." They are specific
targets to be achieved within a shorter time frame, generally one year
or less, in order to achieve the stated goal. Whereas goals describe the
end result, objectives describe the actions or activities that need to
take place in order to achieve the goal. For example, if your goal was
to increase market share, the objective would likely be stated as
something like "Increase market share to 6 percent by the end of the
year."

The goals and objectives of an organization define the key actions that
allow it to execute its chosen strategy. However, in order to be
effective, goals and objectives should be SMART--- specific, measurable,
attainable, realistic/relevant, and time-bound---as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

First, effective goals should be

specific---

there's the "S" in SMART goals. They should be clear and easy to
understand. A specific goal answers questions like "What needs to be
accomplished?" To illustrate this, imagine that you've decided to
improve your grade point average. "Improve my GPA" is indeed a goal, but
it's too vague to be a helpful goal. By how many points do you want to
improve your GPA? To make your goal more meaningful (and specific), you
might want to restate your goal as "Improve my current GPA from 2.8 to
3.5."

Second, effective goals should be

measurable

---there's the "M" in SMART goals. Specificity is a solid start, but
quantifying your goals makes it easier to track progress and see when
you've achieved your goal. The bottom line is, you can't see results
without knowing what they look like, and if you're not measuring
anything, how will you know when and if you've accomplished it? Your
original goal of "improve my GPA" isn't measurable. How will you know
when you've achieved your goal? When you've increased it by .1, .2, .5,
or even a full point? By setting a goal to "improve my current GPA from
2.8 to 3.5 by the end of the semester," you've set a goal that's easily
measurable---just look at your grades at the end of the semester!

Third, effective goals should be

attainable

. There's actually some disagreement as to the name of this third
element. Some marketing experts tout using "ambitious"; others suggest
"achievable" or "actionable." For our purposes, we're going to stick
with "attainable" because although goals should be a reach, establishing
goals that aren't within reach can turn out to be an exercise in
frustration. Let's go back to our GPA analogy. If it's mid-April and
you're barely passing your current classes, you're just setting yourself
up for failure.

Fourth, effective goals should be

realistic

. Once again, there's actually some disagreement as to the name of this
element; you may see it shown as "relevant" in other textbooks or
articles. We're going to use "realistic" because the term reflects the
balance between goals that are too easy and too hard. Taken in the
context of a strategic plan, your goals must represent a substantial
objective that you're willing and able to work toward, but there should
be a reasonable chance that you can achieve it.

:::: {#note-00020 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Getting back to our GPA analogy, if you've got Cs in all of your classes
and it's already mid-April, improving your GPA to 3.5 by the end of the
semester is probably not realistic.

Finally, effective goals should be

time-bound

. Every goal should be grounded by a time frame within which the goal is
to be achieved. Without a deadline, there is little sense of urgency to
work to achieve the goal. Having a goal with a target date (like the end
of the semester) gives you something to focus on and work toward and
prevents everyday tasks from taking priority over your longer-term
goals.

:::: {#note-00021 .note}
::: title
SMART Goals
:::

For more information on establishing SMART Goals, check out this video
from SMA Marketing.

[Why SMART Goals are Important to Your Long-Term Success](#)
::::

## Monitor Progress {#sect-00008}

If you had decided to save money from each of your paychecks to
eventually purchase a new car, you'd probably check the balance in your
savings account on a regular basis to see how you're progressing toward
your goal. The same is true in the strategic planning process. In order
for goals and objectives to be effective, marketers need to monitor them
on a continuous basis to determine if they're on track or if the goals
and objectives need to be refined in response to unforeseen
circumstances.

One way that marketers accomplish this is through the use of a marketing
dashboard. Like the dashboard in your car, which tells you at a glance
how much fuel you have, how fast you're going, and a host of other
important information, a marketing dashboard summarizes important
marketing metrics and key performance indicators (KPIs; to be covered
later in this chapter) into easy-to-understand measurements. This
enables marketers to view ongoing progress so that they can be aware of
potential problems before they actually become serious issues.

:::: {#note-00023 .note}
::: title
Marketing Manager
:::

Marketing manager jobs differ by company and industry, but in general
it's a leadership position in charge of the marketing strategy at a
company or for a product. Marketing managers often complete research,
create pricing parameters, and work with other departments within the
company such as finance, legal, advertising, promotion, and product
development. [Read this *Marketing Manager* article to learn more
about](#) the specifics of what a marketing manager does and the types
of marketing manager that exist. It's commonly known that marketing
managers need to be proficient in problem-solving. [Read this article to
learn why it's important](#) and the specific skills you'll need.

There is growth potential in being a marketing manager. The US Bureau of
Labor Statistics projects a 10 percent growth in the job role from 2021
to 2031, and you [can read more about the job outlook here](#).

Would you like to know more about the job role? Read this [*Forbes*
article to learn the top skills necessary,](#) the typical path to this
job, and degree requirements.

There are many types of jobs in marketing. You'll be introduced to
several throughout this textbook. You'll also want to check out this
list of [15 job titles and what the job role encompasses.](#) Keep in
mind that regardless of where you start in marketing, you have options
as you move in your career journey. Many people move between marketing
roles, and the skills you learn in each role will help you in other
roles.
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00009}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00010}

:::: {#rf-005 .note}
::: title
:::

5\.

"Corporate Structure," Structure & Governance, Procter & Gamble, last
modified March 24, 2020,
https://us.pg.com/structure-and-governance/corporate-structure/.
::::

:::: {#rf-006 .note}
::: title
:::

6\.

Patrick Hull, "Be Visionary. Think Big,"

Forbes

, December 19, 2012,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/patrickhull/2012/12/19/be-visionary-think-big/.
::::

:::: {#rf-007 .note}
::: title
:::

7\.

"Analysis of Volkswagen Mission Statement & Vision Statement 2022,"
Visionary BusinessPerson, last modified August 22, 2022,
https://visionarybusinessperson.com/volkswagen-mission-statement-vision-statement/.
::::

:::: {#rf-008 .note}
::: title
:::

8\.

"Corporate Vision," Fujitsu United States, accessed August 5, 2022,
https://www.fujitsu.com/us/about/philosophy/vision/.
::::

:::: {#rf-009 .note}
::: title
:::

9\.

Barbara Farfan, "Mission Statements from the Automotive Industry," The
Balance Small Business, Dotdash Meredith, updated November 20, 2019,
https://www.thebalancesmb.com/auto-industry-mission-statements-4068550.
::::

:::: {#rf-010 .note}
::: title
:::

10\.

Gennaro Cuofano, "Tesla Mission Statement and Vision Statement Analysis
2022," FourWeekMBA, last modified May 21, 2022,
https://fourweekmba.com/tesla-vision-statement-mission-statement/.
::::

:::: {#rf-011 .note}
::: title
:::

11\.

Christine Rowland, "Apple Inc.'s Mission Statement and Vision Statement
(an Analysis)," Panmore Institute, updated May 9, 2022,
https://panmore.com/apple-mission-statement-vision-statement.
::::

:::: {#rf-012 .note}
::: title
:::

12\.

"About Us," About IKEA, Inter IKEA Systems, updated June 12, 2022,
https://about.ikea.com/en/about-us.
::::

:::: {#rf-013 .note}
::: title
:::

13\.

Anthony Rivera, "Netflix's Mission Statement & Vision Statement: A
Strategic Analysis," Rancord Society, updated November 10, 2019,
https://www.rancord.org/netflix-corporate-vision-statement-mission-statement-strategic-analysis.
::::

:::: {#rf-014 .note}
::: title
:::

14\.

"eBay Mission and Vision Analysis," Mission Statement, last modified
January 27, 2021, https://mission-statement.com/ebay/.
::::

:::: {#rf-015 .note}
::: title
:::

15\.

Alessio Bresciani, "51 Mission Statement Examples from the World's Best
Companies," Foresight & Strategy, AlessioBresciani.com, last modified
April 11, 2022,
https://alessiobresciani.com/foresight-strategy/51-mission-statement-examples-from-the-worlds-best-companies/.
::::

:::: {#rf-016 .note}
::: title
:::

16\.

Aman Kaur, "Conducting a Gap Analysis: A Four-Step Template," ClearPoint
Strategy, Ascendant Strategy Management Group, last modified January 4,
2022, https://www.clearpointstrategy.com/gap-analysis-template/.
::::

:::: {#rf-017 .note}
::: title
:::

17\.

Kaur, "Conducting a Gap Analysis."
::::

:::: {#rf-018 .note}
::: title
:::

18\.

Kaur, "Conducting a Gap Analysis."
::::

:::: {#rf-019 .note}
::: title
:::

19\.

Kaur, "Conducting a Gap Analysis."
::::

:::: {#rf-020 .note}
::: title
:::

20\.

"Goals vs. Objectives: What's the Difference?," Indeed Career Guide,
Indeed, updated July 1, 2022,
https://www.indeed.com/career-advice/career-development/difference-between-goals-and-objectives.
::::

:::: {#rf-021 .note}
::: title
:::

21\.

Indeed, "Goals vs. Objectives."
::::

:::: {#rf-022 .note}
::: title
:::

22\.

Helen Sabell, "10 Steps for Effective Goal Setting: Set and Achieve
Goals," The College for Adult Learning, updated March 15, 2021,
https://collegeforadultlearning.edu.au/effective-goal-setting-set-and-achieve-goals/.
::::

:::: {#rf-023 .note}
::: title
:::

23\.

"Marketing Dashboard," Marketing Dictionary, Skyword, December 1, 2016,
https://www.skyword.com/marketing-dictionary/marketing-dashboard/.
::::

# 

business-level strategy

outline of the actions and decisions a company plans to take to reach
its goals and objectives

corporate-level strategy

strategy that establishes the overall value of a business through
setting strategic goals and motivating employees to achieve them

functional strategy

actions and goals assigned to business units that support the overall
business strategy

gap analysis

an internal analysis of a company or organization to identify and review
its inherent deficiencies that may hinder its ability to meet its goals

goals

the outcomes one intends to achieve

marketing dashboard

summarizes important marketing metrics and key performance indicators
into easy-to-understand measurements

mission statement

action-based statement declaring the purpose of an organization

objectives

specific targets to be achieved within a specified period of time

strategic business unit

a relatively autonomous division of a large company that operates as an
independent enterprise with responsibility for a particular range of
products or activities

strategy

set of plans, actions, and goals that outlines how a business will
compete

vision statement

aspirational statement that articulates what an organization aims to
achieve
