m00016

f6e56e06-c667-49f4-9c6b-020ad60a4bd0

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Explain the role of marketing in the strategic planning process.

Discuss the business portfolio and identify planning tools.

Describe a SWOT analysis.

List and describe marketing strategies based on analytics.

# Explain the Role of Marketing in the Strategic Planning Process {#sect-00002}

To get a better idea of the importance of marketing in the strategic
planning process, let's imagine that you're the owner of a manufacturing
business that produces widgets. You've been able to recruit top
engineering talent to design these widgets and source components from
trusted, reliable vendors, and your manufacturing facility is efficient
and can produce the widgets in a cost-effective manner. Sounds like a
winning business, doesn't it?

Well, the only thing we've left out of the equation for success is
customers, and without customers, the finest engineering staff and
manufacturing facility in the world won't ring the bell in terms of
profits or revenue. You need to determine who your customers are, what
their needs and wants are, how you're going to reach them, and how
you're going to persuade them to buy your widgets. That's where
marketing comes into the strategic planning process, and that's why it
plays a crucial role.

Marketing in the strategic planning process has several basic but
critical functions:

First, marketers assist the strategic planning team in executing a
marketing philosophy throughout the strategic planning process.

Second, marketers assist the organization in gathering and analyzing
information necessary to examine the current situation (the first step
in a gap analysis).

Third, marketers are responsible for the identification of trends in the
marketing environment and assessing the potential impact of those
trends.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

# Business Portfolio Definition {#sect-00003}

As noted above, many businesses have a single product or business unit.
However, larger organizations such as Apple, Alphabet, General Electric,
Meta, and Microsoft often have multiple diverse business units called
strategic business units. Despite the fact that these SBUs report
directly to the parent company's headquarters, they typically develop
their own vision statements, mission statements, objectives, and goals,
and the strategic planning for these SBUs is performed separately and
apart from other SBUs within the organization. When companies have
multiple products or business units, these comprise the business
portfolio---the total group of product lines, services, and business
units that the company possesses.

To give you a better sense of what a business portfolio entails, look at
[\#](#), which illustrates the products and services of Microsoft and
how each offering contributes to the overall strategic plan of the
company. Microsoft reported \$168 billion in revenue in fiscal year
2021, and each of its product lines (or strategic business units)
contributes to this revenue in differing amounts. It's easy to see from
this breakdown why each of these businesses under the Microsoft
"umbrella" would have different strategic plans to execute within the
markets they serve. You likely wouldn't have one overarching marketing
or business strategy for all of these SBUs because the markets for
Office, Gaming, LinkedIn, and the other SBUs are likely very different
and would require different strategies to reach and retain customers.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# Analyze and Design the Business Portfolio {#sect-00004}

There are many reasons why an organization would establish separate
business units or product lines as it grows. For example, if the current
product line is in a market where growth is limited, it may choose to
branch out to other product lines or markets. Alternatively, an
organization may choose to expand into other product lines to take
advantage of emerging opportunities.

Emerson Electric, headquartered in St. Louis, Missouri, has five
business segments: Network Power, Process Management, Industrial
Automation, Climate Technologies, and Commercial and Residential
Solutions (i.e., tools and storage). These business segments provide
products as diverse as hardware and software technologies; motors; fluid
control systems; heating and air-conditioning products and services; and
tools, storage products, and appliances for residential, health care,
and food services. When you consider divisions as diverse as these, it
should be readily evident why each is a separate division with separate
strategies to compete in its respective marketplaces.

Conversely, a business may choose to expand in areas in which it already
has experience and can use the power of its core competencies to
establish sustainable competitive advantage with new products in
existing markets.

There are a few tools that can help determine which course of action is
best advised given the current circumstances of the organization, the
marketplace, and other factors. Let's take a look at a few of them.

## Boston Consulting Group (BCG) Matrix {#sect-00005}

The BCG matrix is a model developed by Boston Consulting Group that can
be used to analyze a business's product lines or SBUs and make decisions
about which to invest in in the future and which they should try to
minimize further investment in or even eliminate. The bottom line is
that no business has unlimited funds to invest in its product lines, and
the BCG matrix is a useful model in determining how to allocate money in
terms of marketing, research and development (R&D), etc. to that
portfolio.

As shown in [\#](#), the BCG matrix considers both market share and
market growth rate. The SBUs or products that have high market share in
a high-growth market are called *stars* and are placed in the upper left
quadrant. These are the opportunities that hold the most promise for the
organization.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

Conversely, those SBUs or products that have low market share in a
low-growth market are referred to as *dogs* and are placed in the lower
right quadrant. These are prime candidates for divestiture or
elimination because they have relatively low growth potential, and
although the business has significant funds tied up in them, they bring
in virtually nothing in terms of revenues. Divestiture could also
provide needed capital to invest in your stars or question marks.

*Cash cows*, in the lower left quadrant, are an interesting breed, so to
speak. A cash cow is an SBU or product that has high market share in a
low-growth market. They're valuable to a business because they generate
significant revenue that can fund other strategic initiatives or
emerging opportunities. Incidentally, they're called cash cows because
the thinking is to "milk" these products for profits.

Those SBUs or products that have a low market share in a high-growth
market are called *question marks* (sometimes also called "problem
children") and are placed in the upper left quadrant. Question marks are
among the most complex decisions to be considered when developing a BCG
matrix because a root cause analysis may be required in order to
determine why these SBUs are, in fact, question marks. Obviously, with
high-market growth, the market is strong, but there are one or more
reasons why your organization hasn't been able to capitalize on it and
gain market share. Does the product line need more investment in order
to move into the "star" category? Is competition so strong in this
market that additional funding in terms of advertising campaigns or
other marketing tactics render them useless? Is the question mark just a
trend in which you can expect high growth without a lot of market share
for a short period of time?

Once you have categorized each of your SBUs or products on the BCG
matrix, you'll have a crystal-clear vision of where each stands and can
identify which you should prioritize and which need to be divested.

To better understand the BCG model, let's do a simplified matrix for
Apple and some of its products (see [\#](#)). Because Apple has so many
products and services, we're showing only four hardware products in this
matrix.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

In this sample matrix, we're going to place the Apple iPhone in the star
category. You'll recall from our discussion above that stars have
relatively high market share in a growing market. Let's face it: the
iPhone is the shining gem of Apple's portfolio. Even though Apple has
diversified its product line, the iPhone is still responsible for 52
percent of the company's revenue, raking in an astounding \$192 billion
in 2021.

Next, we're going to put the iPad and the MacBook in the cash cow
category. Remember that the BCG matrix is built on two
parameters---market share and market growth. Both the iPad and the
MacBook have relatively high market share compared to competitors, but
the market for these products is not growing much anymore. The Apple
iPad had a 31.5 percent share of the global tablet market during the
first quarter (down from 38 percent in the previous quarter), and the
MacBook still holds popularity, garnering 15.3 percent of the market
share. Both the iPad and the MacBook are well-established products that
continue to generate substantial income for Apple, and these products
require relatively little additional investment for them to remain
profitable.

Let's move on to the question mark category. Remember that question
marks have low market share in a high-growth market, and we're going to
place the Apple iWatch in this category. The iWatch has the potential to
become as big of a hit as the iPhone, but the jury is still out because
there are too many unknowns in the market. Global sales of smartwatches
increased by 13 percent in the first quarter of 2022, and the Apple
iWatch continues to lead in market share. However, Apple will need to
analyze its iWatch vis-à-vis its other products to decide if it should
continue to invest in the product.

Finally, let's move on to the dog quadrant of the matrix. We're going to
place the iPod in this category because market growth has slowed
considerably as people use their phones to listen to music or podcasts.
The iPod has experienced a shrinking market share as a result, and it
wouldn't make sense for Apple to continue to invest in the iPod. As a
matter of fact, Apple announced in May 2022 that it would discontinue
the iPod Touch, while the touch-screen model launched in 2007 will
remain on sale until supplies run out.

:::: {#note-00013 .note}
::: title
BCG Matrix
:::

Would you like to learn more about the BCG Matrix? Watch this brief
video from Solve It Like a Marketer.

[BCG Matrix \| Product Portfolio Analysis \| Explained & Examples
](#)
::::

## SWOT Analysis {#sect-00006}

SWOT is an acronym for a business's strengths, weaknesses,
opportunities, and threats, and it is a useful aid for zeroing in on a
feasible marketing strategy. The purpose of a SWOT analysis is really
quite simple. Marketers want to identify the strengths and weaknesses in
the organization's *internal* environment as well as the opportunities
and threats that exist in the organization's *external* environment. It
is generally presented in the format seen in [\#](#). You would complete
the template with bullet points in each of the four quadrants.

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

A SWOT analysis will aid in taking advantages of the organization's
strengths and opportunities while avoiding (or at least minimizing)
weaknesses and threats to its success. Realistically, some of the
factors are in the control of the company (i.e., strengths and
weaknesses), but other factors are outside the control of the company
(i.e., opportunities and threats). Let's consider each of these in a
little more detail.

Strengths can be factors such as patents or trademarks possessed by the
company that hinder competitors in participating in the market; a better
cost structure than competitors; a talented, innovative staff; or strong
brand recognition in the market. Strengths are internal to the
organization, and they're also positives. Questions to ask when
developing this section may be: What do you do well? What unique
resources you can draw on? Consider a company like Starbucks. If you
were preparing a SWOT analysis for Starbucks, its strengths might
include a strong brand image, solid financial performance, impressive
growth in the number of stores, and an extensive international supply
chain.

Weaknesses are also factors within a company's internal environment, but
these are hindrances to your success, so they're categorized as
negatives. Weaknesses may be difficulty in accessing capital or funding,
outdated technology, an unmotivated workforce, weak brand recognition,
or high levels of debt. Let's go back to Starbucks. If you were
preparing a SWOT analysis for Starbucks, some of its weaknesses may be
high prices versus the competition and the imitability of its products.

Now we'll switch over to external factors that affect the business.
Opportunities are openings for something positive to happen if (and only
if) you can capitalize on them. Opportunities can be moving into a new
market segment that offers improved profits (like a snack food
manufacturer moving into the health foods sector), competitors that have
quality or delivery problems, or impending legislation that would
favorably affect your organization if you're able to capitalize on it.
Once again, let's go back to Starbucks. If you were preparing a SWOT
analysis for Starbucks, some of its opportunities might be expansion in
developing markets, a coffee subscription service similar to that
offered by Panera Bread, and the introduction of new products and
holiday flavors.

Finally, threats are anything external to your organization that can
negatively impact your business. These may include supply chain
problems, ongoing staffing problems, new competitors entering the
market, or impending legislation that would negatively impact your
organization, like tariffs. If you were doing a SWOT analysis for
Starbucks, you might identify threats such as competition with
lower-cost coffee sellers, tightening discretionary spending due to
inflation, or the rising price of coffee beans.

:::: {#note-00018 .note}
::: title
SWOT Analysis
:::

Check out this video for a very simple example of a SWOT analysis.

[Animation: SWOT Analysis](#)
::::

When preparing a SWOT analysis, it is also helpful to compare elements
by ranking strengths and weaknesses (internal factors) in terms of
relative competitive importance. Marketers can also rank threats and
opportunities (external factors) in terms of their likelihood and
magnitude.

# Strategy {#sect-00007}

Earlier in this chapter, we pointed out the differences between
corporate-level strategy, business-level strategy, and functional
strategy. If you're a fan of movies like *Other People's Money* or *Wall
Street*, you might think that corporate strategy focuses on hostile
takeovers, mergers, and ruthless acquisitions.

:::: {#note-00020 .note}
::: title
*Moneyball*
:::

The movie *Moneyball* is about a baseball general manager assembling a
team by using computer analysis to hire new players. This is a great
example of using analytics to inform strategy. Watch a clip of the movie
here, where you see the analytics applied.

[Moneyball \| Peter Brand\'s First Day](#)
::::

## Market Penetration {#sect-00008}

When a company focuses on growing its market share in its existing
markets, it is using what's known as a market penetration strategy. This
approach generally entails significant expenditures in advertising and
other marketing efforts in order to influence consumers' brand choice
and create a brand reputation for the company, thereby increasing its
market share.

In some mature industries (like soap, laundry detergent, or toothpaste),
a market penetration strategy becomes a way of life because nearly all
competitors are also engaged in intensive advertising and battle for
market share. It becomes a way of life because companies fear that if
they don't advertise as much as or more than their competitors, they
will lose market share.

To give you an idea of how fierce the competition is with a market
penetration strategy, consider Procter & Gamble, which spent \$4.7
billion on advertising in 2020.

## Product Development {#sect-00009}

As noted above, a market penetration strategy focuses on existing
products and existing markets. By contrast, a product development
strategy involves the creation of new or improved products in order to
drive growth in sales, revenue, and profit. Although the advertising
expenditures involved with a market penetration strategy may be
significant, they often pale compared to the expenditures involved in a
product development strategy. This is because product development
generally requires significant investment in R&D activities.

The automobile industry provides a good illustration of the product
development strategy. Car makers generally refresh their models every
few years to encourage car owners to trade in their old vehicles and buy
the redesigned cars with the latest tech features such as driver assist,
Wi-Fi hotspots, and Apple CarPlay and Android Auto. At the same time,
all the manufacturers are spending billions of dollars developing new
electric vehicle models to meet ambitious goals for phasing out
gasoline-powered engines.

Another great example of a product development strategy is Tide laundry
detergent. Tide has undergone more than 50 formulation changes over the
past 40 years in an effort to continually improve its product's
performance. The name always stays the same, but Tide has a "new and
improved" formula with each new product release.

If you doubt the power of a product development strategy, the next time
you go to the grocery store or supermarket, just look at how many "new
and improved" products are on the shelves!

## Market Development {#sect-00010}

A market development strategy involves searching for new market segments
and uses for a company's products. This strategy can involve the launch
of its existing products into new markets or different geographical
areas. In doing so, the company attempts to capitalize on the strength
of the brand name it has developed in the existing markets and find new
markets in which to compete.

Facebook is a great example of a market development strategy. It's
difficult to remember when Facebook wasn't a household word, but
Facebook started out as a small platform that enabled Harvard University
students to compare headshots. The popularity of the platform spread to
other college campuses, and eventually Facebook allowed nonstudents to
join. It looks like the strategy worked---Facebook is now the largest
social network in the world, with nearly 3 billion users!

To help you better understand these strategies, let's consider each one
from the perspective of one company---Harley-Davidson. If
Harley-Davidson were to adopt a market penetration strategy, the company
would focus on selling more Harley-Davidson motorcycles in the US
market. If the company were to adopt a product development strategy, it
would begin selling a new product such as biker clothing for children
under the Harley-Davidson brand in the US market. Harley-Davidson is
currently pursuing a market development strategy, with plans to develop
a new motorcycle to manufacture and sell in China. Harley-Davidson's
diversification strategy might entail selling new products like
children's biker clothing in China for the first time.

## Product Diversification {#sect-00011}

A product diversification strategy is still another tool that companies
can use to improve profitability and increase sales of new products.
This strategy can be utilized at both the business level and the
corporate level. At the business level, marketers would expand into a
new segment of an industry in which the company is already operating.
For example, consider Apple. The company launched its revolutionary
iPhone in 2007, but it didn't stop there. It has since diversified into
tablets and other technology-related products. At the corporate level,
let's consider a dine-in restaurant that adds corporate catering and
perhaps a fleet of food trucks---both businesses outside the scope of
its existing business.

There are three types of diversification techniques, as shown in
[\#](#).

<figure id="fig-00005">

</figure>

Let's look at each of these strategies in a little more detail.

The concept of concentric diversification revolves around the addition
of similar products or services to an existing business. If a picture is
worth a thousand words, then an example has to be worth even more,
particularly an example to which you can easily relate as a student. As
you're reading this chapter, consider book publishers, like Harper
Collins, Simon & Schuster, or Penguin/Random House. These book
publishers don't only print the works of one author; rather, they have
hundreds or perhaps thousands of authors' works in their arsenals. These
publishers will publish print books, e-books (like the one you're
reading right now), and audiobooks and may even sell the rights to some
of the books for film and TV adaptations, allowing them to garner
additional streams of revenue for one product.

Conversely, the concept of horizontal diversification involves making
available to existing customers new and perhaps even unrelated products
or services so that you can garner a larger customer base. For example,
consider a company that produces dental hygiene products like
toothbrushes and dental floss. In order to increase sales to existing
customers, the company may decide to introduce into the market a line of
oral irrigators or teeth whiteners. These products are new to the
company, but they still serve the same customer base as its existing
products.

Finally, conglomerate diversification takes horizontal diversification
one step further. Conglomerate diversification involves the development
and addition of new products or services that are significantly
unrelated. You're not only introducing a new product, you're introducing
a new product that is completely unrelated to your existing line of
business. Consider General Electric when looking for an example of
conglomerate diversification. General Electric started out as a lighting
business, but over the years, it has diversified into medical devices,
household appliances, aircraft engines, financial services, and more.
That's taking conglomerate diversification to a whole new level!

:::: {#note-00032 .note}
::: title
Blue Ocean Strategy
:::

Learn about market-creating strategies known as the Blue Ocean strategy
from *Harvard Business Review*, where it uses Cirque du Soleil as an
example.

[The Explainer: Blue Ocean Strategy](#)
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00012}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00013}

:::: {#rf-024 .note}
::: title
:::

24\.

"The Role of Marketing in the Strategic Planning Process," Studopedia,
accessed June 3, 2022, https://studopedia.org/7-101679.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-025 .note}
::: title
:::

25\.

"What Is the Strategic Business Unit? The Complete Guide,"

AVADA Commerce Blog

, AVADA, May 12, 2022,
https://blog.avada.io/resources/strategic-business-unit.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-026 .note}
::: title
:::

26\.

Microsoft,

Annual Report 2021

, October 2021,
https://www.microsoft.com/investor/reports/ar21/index.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-027 .note}
::: title
:::

27\.

Microsoft,

Annual Report 2021

.
::::

:::: {#rf-028 .note}
::: title
:::

28\.

David Weedmark, "Emerson: Company Profile," The Balance Careers, Dotdash
Meredith, updated May 30, 2019,
https://www.thebalancecareers.com/emerson-company-profile-2071327.
::::

:::: {#rf-029 .note}
::: title
:::

29\.

David Curry, "Apple Statistics (2022)," App Data, Business of Apps,
updated May 4, 2022,
https://www.businessofapps.com/data/apple-statistics/.
::::

:::: {#rf-030 .note}
::: title
:::

30\.

"The BCG Matrix \| Boston Matrix," Expert Program Management, last
modified October 2, 2019,
https://expertprogrammanagement.com/2011/04/bcg-matrix-boston-matrix/.
::::

:::: {#rf-031 .note}
::: title
:::

31\.

"Tablet Shipments Market Share by Vendor Worldwide from 2nd Quarter 2011
to 1st Quarter 2022," Statista, accessed June 27, 2022,
https://www.statista.com/statistics/276635/market-share-held-by-tablet-vendors/.
::::

:::: {#rf-032 .note}
::: title
:::

32\.

William Gallagher, "Apple Watch Remains the Best Seller as Smartwatch
Market Grows," AppleInsider, Quiller Media, June 1, 2022,
https://appleinsider.com/articles/22/06/01/apple-watch-remains-the-best-seller-as-smartwatch-market-grows.
::::

:::: {#rf-033 .note}
::: title
:::

33\.

Gallagher, "Apple Watch."
::::

:::: {#rf-034 .note}
::: title
:::

34\.

Expert Program Management, "BCG Matrix \| Boston Matrix."
::::

:::: {#rf-035 .note}
::: title
:::

35\.

Expert Program Management, "BCG Matrix \| Boston Matrix."
::::

:::: {#rf-036 .note}
::: title
:::

36\.

S. K. Gupta, "Starbucks SWOT 2022: SWOT Analysis of Starbucks," Business
Strategy Hub, updated January 24, 2022,
https://bstrategyhub.com/swot-analysis-of-starbucks-starbucks-swot/.
::::

:::: {#rf-037 .note}
::: title
:::

37\.

Gupta, "Starbucks SWOT 2022."
::::

:::: {#rf-038 .note}
::: title
:::

38\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-039 .note}
::: title
:::

39\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-040 .note}
::: title
:::

40\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-041 .note}
::: title
:::

41\.

"Procter & Gamble's Advertising Spending in the United States from 2009
to 2020," Statista, accessed June 5, 2022,
https://www.statista.com/statistics/191998/ad-spending-of-procter-and-gamble-in-the-us/.
::::

:::: {#rf-042 .note}
::: title
:::

42\.

Charles W. L. Hill and Gareth R. Jones,

Essentials of Strategic Management

, 3rd ed. (Mason, OH: South-Western Cengage Learning, 2012).
::::

:::: {#rf-043 .note}
::: title
:::

43\.

Richard Daniels, "What Is Intensive Strategy? 3 Types of Intensive
Strategies," Business Study Notes, updated August 7, 2020,
https://www.businessstudynotes.com/finance/types-of-intensive-strategies/.
::::

:::: {#rf-044 .note}
::: title
:::

44\.

Hill and Jones,

Essentials of Strategic Management

.
::::

:::: {#rf-045 .note}
::: title
:::

45\.

Mark Hall, "Facebook,"

Encyclopaedia Britannica

, updated November 9, 2021, https://www.britannica.com/topic/Facebook.
::::

:::: {#rf-046 .note}
::: title
:::

46\.

Gary Moorhouse, "Business Diversification Strategy: The Best Examples,"

Latest News & Blog

, Shorts Chartered Accountants, August 9, 2021,
https://blog.shorts.uk.com/business-diversification-strategy-examples.
::::

:::: {#rf-047 .note}
::: title
:::

47\.

"Product Diversification," Corporate Finance Institute, CFI Education,
updated February 1, 2022,
https://corporatefinanceinstitute.com/resources/knowledge/strategy/product-diversification/.
::::

:::: {#rf-048 .note}
::: title
:::

48\.

"Concentric Diversification: Examples, Strategy, Advantages and
Disadvantages,"

Harappa Blogs

, Harappa Learning, December 9, 2021,
https://harappa.education/harappa-diaries/concentric-diversification-strategy/.
::::

:::: {#rf-049 .note}
::: title
:::

49\.

Harappa Learning, "Concentric Diversification."
::::

:::: {#rf-050 .note}
::: title
:::

50\.

"What Is Horizontal Diversification? Definition, Benefits and Examples,"
Indeed Career Guide, Indeed, March 15, 2021,
https://www.indeed.com/career-advice/career-development/horizontal-diversification.
::::

:::: {#rf-051 .note}
::: title
:::

51\.

Conglomerate Diversification: Examples, Strategy, Meaning, Advantages
and Disadvantages,"

Harappa Blogs

, Harappa Learning, December 31, 2021,
https://harappa.education/harappa-diaries/conglomerate-diversification/.
::::

# 

BCG matrix

Boston Consulting Group's framework for analyzing an organization's
strategic business units

business portfolio

the group of products, services, and business units that a company
possesses

concentric diversification

the addition of similar products or services to an existing business

conglomerate diversification

the development and addition of new products or services that are
significantly unrelated to a company's current offerings

horizontal diversification

the development of new and perhaps even unrelated products or services
to market to existing customers so that a company can garner a larger
customer base

market development strategy

a growth strategy that identifies and develops new market segments for
current products

market penetration strategy

a strategy used when a company focuses on growing its market share in
its existing markets

product development strategy

complete process of delivering a new product or improving an existing
one for customers

product diversification strategy

strategy to increase profitability and achieve higher sales volume
through new products

SWOT analysis

identification of internal strengths and weaknesses and external
opportunities and threats impacting a business
