m00017

d0863c0b-d7fd-46e6-9f82-00400fae21f1

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Explain the purpose of a marketing plan.

List and discuss elements that should be included in a marketing plan.

# Purpose and Structure of a Marketing Plan {#sect-00002}

A company's marketing plan ([\#](#)) is without a doubt one of the most
important planning tools in business. You might think that it's an
activity that generates an impressive, colorful document that sits in a
desk drawer until the next time it gets revised, but you'd be wrong.

If you're a new business seeking funding, the bank will want to see and
understand your marketing plan before parting with funds. If you have an
existing business that you want to grow, investors will likely go over
your marketing plan with a fine-tooth comb to understand how additional
funding will generate a positive return. Even if you're not seeking
external funding, you still need a marketing plan to help you establish
and achieve your sales and marketing goals in the most effective manner.
That's because the marketing plan will set forth the specific actions
that marketing team members need to take in order to reach target
customers, build brand awareness, and of course, generate increased
revenue.

If you like sports analogies, think about marketing plans as being akin
to playbooks in football. A football playbook sets forth what needs to
be done to win the game. The playbook breaks the team's strategy into
actionable plays and defines who is responsible for what in order to win
the game. That's exactly the purpose of a marketing plan as well!

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

## Structure of a Marketing Plan {#sect-00003}

Do a quick Internet search on "structure of a marketing plan," and
you'll get countless results. To make this even more confusing, there is
little agreement within marketing about the precise structure of a
marketing plan. Some marketing "experts" argue for 10 components, others
for 5 or 6 components. For our purposes in this book, we're going to use
a 12-element marketing plan comprising the elements shown in [\#](#),
each of which will be discussed in detail.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

If your professor has assigned the semester-long marketing plan template
assignment, these next sections will provide you with excellent guidance
for completing each of the sections. So let's dive right in.

## Executive Summary {#sect-00004}

As the name suggests, the executive summary of your marketing plan
provides those who will be reviewing your plan with a brief overview
(usually one to two pages). It's going to give the reader a quick
synopsis of the main parts of the plan---an overview of what your
company has done, what it plans to do, and how it plans to do it.

Think of the executive summary as being an "elevator pitch" of the plan.
If you're not familiar with elevator pitches, they're persuasive,
concise introductions that provide the listener with the information
they need to know within just a short period of time---usually the
length of the average elevator ride.

The executive summary of your marketing plan should succinctly cover the
main parts of the plan. It should contain information about the company,
brand, products/services, the market itself, and the overall marketing
direction of the company.

It's important to keep in mind that a marketing plan is typically
written in sections separated by headings or subheadings. That's not the
case with the executive summary. You'll write the executive summary as a
series of paragraphs, and each paragraph will focus on a different
section of the marketing plan.

Instead of talking about the executive summary strictly in abstract
terms, let's see how this plays out in an example.

Introduction.

In this paragraph, you're going to provide the reader with an
explanation of what they can expect. You're providing the context for
the plan in order to make the subsequent parts of the plan easier to
understand. In the introduction, briefly explain the plan, its purpose,
and the key benefits to potential customers. Remember the KISS rule---

k

eep

i

t

s

hort and

s

imple. Here's an example that might give some insight on what the
introduction should look like:

This marketing plan is presented for ABC Company, a manufacturer of
electronic components for a variety of industries. We have developed a
new product for the health care industry, and this marketing plan will
demonstrate that ABC Company has a unique opportunity to expand into
this dynamic, growing market.

Description of Company and Team.

In this paragraph, you're going to briefly describe your business. Be
sure to include a succinct synopsis of the company's history, legal
structure, and customer base. You'll also want to address a broad
overview of sales figures. You will also list the key players involved
in the business, including their positions within the company; their
responsibilities, skills, and experience; and their role in achieving
your marketing goals. This is particularly important if your company is
seeking funding. The purpose of this section is twofold: (1) to convince
lenders and/or investors to provide requested funds, and (2) to prove
that you have the right team on board to capitalize on the opportunity
you have defined. Once again, let's see how this section might appear on
ABC Company's marketing plan. Please note that we've only listed two key
members of the team for the sake of brevity, but you may include others:

ABC Company was founded in 2002 and is based in Park City, Utah. The
company produces electronic components for a variety of industries. When
the company was founded, it produced electronic apparatuses primarily
for the automotive industry. Its product line has expanded over the past
20+ years to include electronic apparatuses for the appliance and
heating, ventilating, and cooling (HVAC) industries.

Key Team Members:

Khadija Simone, founder and CEO---Khadija has over 30 years of
experience in the electronic apparatus industry, having managed
divisions of two Fortune 500 companies before founding ABC Company.
Khadija has a BS in electrical engineering from Purdue University and a
master of business administration from the University of Chicago.

Tanasha Turner, vice president of marketing---Tanasha has 20 years of
sales and business development experience from working with several
start-up companies that she helped grow into large businesses. She
joined ABC Company in 2016 and has spearheaded the entry of the company
into the appliance industry. Tanasha has a BA in marketing from the
University of Pennsylvania and a master's in business marketing from
California Coast University.

Description of Market Factors and Trends.

In this paragraph, you will set forth a brief description of the current
marketplace and industry sectors within which you sell your products
and/or services, the primary trends affecting and influencing them, and
the innovations that are currently taking place within the market. Let's
look at ABC Company's example:

There are several large players in the electronic apparatus industry,
including EAC Industries and Antwell Industries, as well as a few
smaller companies that sell similar products to the automotive,
appliance, and HVAC industries. The rapid pace of innovations in the
industry is stimulating demand for newer and faster apparatuses. Digital
technologies such as 5G mobile communication networks and 3D printing
are expected to aid in the development of innovative electronic
apparatuses.

Description of Products or Services Being Marketed.

In this paragraph, you will describe the key features and benefits of
the new product being introduced in the marketing plan and outline its
unique selling propositions to demonstrate how your company's products
differ from or are superior to those of your competitors. You'll recall
that ABC Company has developed a new product aimed at the health care
industry, so this portion of its executive summary might look something
like this:

As noted above, ABC Company has created a new electronic apparatus for
the health care industry. The success of this product would provide the
company with an inroad to a new industry that uses the sophisticated
technology developed by the company. This new product would provide the
health care industry with improved efficiencies and cost savings
vis-à-vis those that are offered by existing products on the market.
Although there are similar products designed for other industries, there
are currently no competitors for this type of product designed
specifically for the health care industry.

Description of Customer Base and Related Marketing Activities.

In this paragraph, you will describe the key aspects of the target
audience for your product and/or service. Where are you going to find
your target customers? How will you reach them in terms of a promotional
strategy? What methods do you intend to use in distributing your product
or service? Let's look at how this paragraph might read in our
hypothetical marketing plan:

The target market for ABC Company's new product is large health care
providers, including hospitals, research laboratories, and clinics. This
marketing plan will outline its campaign to reach this target market
through a combination of direct sales and social media marketing.

Financial Overview.

In this paragraph, you will define the key financial information related
to both the short-term and long-term marketing activities set forth in
the plan. If you are an existing company (like ABC Company), this might
be as simple as highlighting sales growth over the last year and the
anticipated marketing budget for the new product venture. Let's take a
look at how this might look for ABC Company:

ABC Company has experienced significant sales growth in the appliance
and HVAC industries since the company's inception in 2002. Its sales
revenue from these industries last year exceeded \$23.4 million. Our
marketing budget for the coming year in connection with entry into the
health care industry is estimated to be \$150,000.

Summary of Overall Objectives and Strategies.

In this final paragraph, you will briefly describe the plan's goals and
the strategies the company will employ to achieve those goals. Remember
that this executive summary is your marketing plan's "elevator pitch,"
so you'll want to conclude with a couple of sentences that entice the
reader to continue to read your plan. Let's look at how this might play
out for ABC's marketing plan:

ABC Company has developed a marketing plan that will enable it to
quickly make inroads into the health care industry and become the
premier provider of electronic apparatuses to this growing market. We
intend to use our experience and expertise in selling to the appliance
and HVAC industries to showcase how this electronic apparatus can
benefit the health care industry.

## Mission Statement {#sect-00005}

The next section of your marketing plan will be the mission statement of
your company. You'll recall from Section 2.1 that a mission statement is
an action statement that clearly and concisely declares the purpose of
the organization and how it serves its customers. It defines the what,
why, and who of the organization. Once again, a picture (or in this
case, an example) is worth a thousand words. Earlier in this chapter, we
examined the mission statements of a couple of well-known businesses, so
let's take a look at some mission statements for some other well-known
companies:

Pinterest

: "Help people discover the things they love, and inspire them to go do
those things in their daily lives"

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Spotify

: "To unlock the potential of human creativity by giving a million
creative artists the opportunity to live off their art and billions of
fans the opportunity to enjoy and be inspired by it"

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

BBC

: "To act in the public interest, serving all audiences through the
provision of impartial, high-quality and distinctive output and services
which inform, educate and entertain"

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Keep in mind that most mission statements are one to three sentences,
almost never exceeding 150 words. You want to be succinct in letting
people know what you do and who you do it for.

But how do you write a mission statement? You might start out by asking
yourself four fundamental questions---what does the company do, how does
it do it, who does it do it for, and why does it do what it does? The
answers to these questions will likely give you enough information to
synthesize and condense it into a meaningful mission statement. Remember
that your mission statement should be more than just a meaningless
string of "feel good" business jargon. It should be ambitious but
realistic. It should be clear and concise. It should be focused on what
the company does for its customers. Finally, it should keep employees
focused on the organization's objectives.

## SWOT Analysis {#sect-00006}

The next section in your marketing plan will include a SWOT analysis.
We've covered the concept of a SWOT analysis in some detail earlier in
this chapter, so we won't review it here. Suffice it to say that the
SWOT analysis as part of your marketing plan is crucial in identifying
key internal and external influences in your company's current position
so that you can take advantage of the strengths and opportunities,
mitigate the threats, and address your internal weaknesses.

## Objectives and Issues {#sect-00007}

As noted earlier in this chapter, marketing plan objectives should be
SMART---specific, measurable, actionable, realistic, and time-bound.
Within your marketing plan, these objectives should be written in such a
manner that they communicate precisely what needs to be achieved and who
is responsible for each activity. For example, if you were writing this
section of the marketing plan for ABC Company, an objective statement
such as "Increase revenue by introducing a new product in the health
care industry" would be too generic and not actionable. How much do you
want to increase market share and during what time period? A better
objective may be "Generate \$1.7 million in sales in the health care
industry by the end of the next fiscal year." Remember that writing
specific goals and objectives can help you more clearly define and
address the issues outlined in your marketing plan. You should also keep
in mind that the marketing plan objectives aren't limited to just
revenue. You may have objectives like increasing leads, in-store foot
traffic, conversion rates, etc. Just make certain that each of these
objectives is SMART.

## Market Segmentation and Target Market {#sect-00008}

Essentially, what you will define in this section of the marketing plan
is your target audience and your most likely buyers. We will cover
market segmentation and targeting in more detail later in this textbook,
but we'll give you a sneak peek into these concepts. Market segmentation
is the process of dividing a target market into smaller, more defined
categories of people or businesses with common needs and/or wants who
are expected to respond similarly to a marketing action. Ultimately, the
purpose of segmenting a market is to highlight the differences between
groups of customers so that you can decide which group(s) upon which to
focus your marketing efforts and resources---that's your target market.

Your marketing plan should include a description of the market for the
product or service, the segments in this market, and how the plan will
address the target market strategy.

## Buyer Personas {#sect-00009}

The intricacies of buyer personas will also be covered in more detail in
a later chapter, but your takeaway here is that a buyer persona is a
semi-fictional representation of your "ideal customer" that helps you
understand and relate to the audience to which you want to market your
product and/or services. Buyer personas help marketers visualize the
person to whom the company is selling so that marketing messages can be
fine-tuned because brands that feel "human" to their target market
usually succeed in building a rapport with them, improving the brand
reputation for both existing and new customers.

This section of the marketing plan should address who your buyer
personas are (and you can have several). These are one-page visual
profiles outlining the demographics of your ideal customer, such as age,
gender, motivations, and needs. For example, let's assume that your
company sells outdoor apparel and hiking equipment. One of your buyer
personas may be "On-the-go-Evan," a Gen Z male who enjoys being outside
and participating in noncompetitive sports and relies on blog posts,
influencers, and reviews to get unbiased information about the equipment
he needs.

Buyer personas aid marketers in bringing the target customer to life in
a way that both inspires marketing strategies and prepares sales teams
for conversations with customers that connect them in a meaningful way.
How many buyer personas should you create? According to LinkedIn,
although there isn't a "magic number," in most cases three to eight
buyer personas are adequate.

:::: {#note-00006 .note}
::: title
Creating Buyer Personas
:::

Creating buyer personas is an integral part of marketing, and it can be
fun. For more information on steps to creating buyer personas, check out
this tool from [HubSpot that describes buyer personas](#) and provides
an interactive tool for creating them.
::::

## Positioning {#sect-00010}

Similarly, positioning will be covered in more depth in a later chapter.
Remember that you first will have segmented the market by dividing it
into distinct groups of customers and determined which customer group(s)
you want to target. Positioning now defines where your product or
service fits into the marketplace and why it is better than your
competitors' products.

Product positioning is typically illustrated on a perceptual positioning
map that uses two determinant attributes (those factors customers use in
making their purchase decision) on the vertical and horizontal axes, and
the marketer places his or her product offering on the map, along with
those of the major competitors.

Once you've developed the map, you'll have a clearer idea of where your
product or service stands in relation to the competition. The questions
to address in your marketing plan might include the following:

Do consumer attitudes toward your product or service match what you want
them to think about it?

Do consumer attitudes toward your competitors' products or services
match what you perceive?

Who are the competitors that consumers perceive as offering products or
services that are close to yours?

Are there holes or gaps in the map, indicating the potential for new
offerings?

:::: {#note-00007 .note}
::: title
Creating a Perceptual Positioning Map
:::

See an example of a perceptual positioning map as applied to the
fast-food industry.

[Perceptual Mapping & Product Positioning Explained](#)

An important aspect of these maps is understanding how your products and
your competition are perceived by customers, and this video shows you
how to process and map this information.

[S-T-P - Positioning](#)

Check out this example using chocolate. If you're interested in using
Excel data to create the map, watch this video example.

[How to Make a Perceptual Map (Positioning Map) in Excel \| Perceptual
Mapping Examples](#)
::::

## Current Marketing Situation {#sect-00011}

This section of your marketing plan should provide the reader with a
clear description of the current state of the marketplace, including
your target market and the competitive environment. It should include a
synopsis of the research into and analysis of your target market, your
competitors, challenges in the marketplace, and the company's
competitive differentiators. Some of the key items to address in the
plan are as follows:

Market Description.

This isn't intended to be a comprehensive list, but this section should
address things like statistics about the size of your target market;
whether it is growing, shrinking, or staying the same; if it is
changing; and why.

:::: {#note-00008 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Product Review.

The product review section of your marketing plan summarizes the main
features of your company's products, including information about sales,
price, and gross margins.

Competitive Analysis.

This section should include a discussion of your top competitors and how
they fare in the marketplace vis-à-vis your company's products and/or
services. This typically involves researching major competitors to glean
insights into their products or services, sales, marketing tactics,
product quality, pricing, market share, and distribution.

## Marketing Strategy {#sect-00012}

Now let's get to the heart of the matter. This section of the marketing
plan essentially sets forth the broad marketing strategy or game plan
for achieving the objectives previously set forth in the plan. It should
consist of specific strategies for target markets, positioning, the
marketing mix (i.e., product, price, place, and promotion), and
anticipated marketing expenditure levels.

Product Strategy.

This is the "road map" that you'll use to develop your product(s) or
features(s), including all tasks needed to achieve the objectives set
forth in the marketing plan. The product strategy essentially outlines
how the product(s) or service(s) will benefit the business, what problem
it will solve, and the impact that it will make on customers and the
business. It's only when this strategy has been set forth in
straightforward terms that it can act as a baseline upon which you can
measure success before, during, and after production.

:::: {#note-00010 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Pricing Strategy.

Pricing will be covered in a later chapter in this text, but be aware
that pricing is one of the key components of any marketing plan. Not
only will it determine how much revenue (profit) you will earn, but it
will also play a key role in positioning your product in the minds of
consumers. The "right" pricing strategy is one that conveys the message
you want to get across to your target market in terms of quality and
features vis-à-vis the competition because price is often what is used
to determine the perceived (not actual) quality of the product or
service. Some of the factors you'll want to consider in developing this
section of your marketing plan are

setting a price that sends the right message in terms of quality and
value in the minds of your target market,

setting a price that supports your promotion strategy (to be covered
below), and

setting a price that maximizes profit.

:::: {#note-00011 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Promotion Strategy.

Your promotion strategy sets forth the tactics you intend to implement
in your marketing plan in order to increase demand for your product(s)
or service(s). List the methods you will use to gain awareness and
interest in your product from those in your target audience. Methods of
reaching potential consumers abound---company websites, social media
networks, trade shows, and radio/television/website advertising. You'll
want to list the advantages and disadvantages of each method and
indicate why and how much it will cost to employ the method(s) you have
selected.

Distribution Strategy.

Your distribution strategy describes how customers in your target market
will purchase from you. Will they buy directly from your website, from a
storefront, or through distributors or retailers? What are the costs
involved in this type of distribution, and why do you believe your
distribution strategy will enable you to get the right product into the
hands of the right consumer at the right time?

## Action Programs {#sect-00013}

You're getting to the end of the plan (finally). The marketing
strategies outlined in the section above should now be translated into
specific action programs that indicate what is to be done, when it is to
be done, by whom it will be done, and the cost involved. The action
program should list when activities will be started, reviewed, and
completed.

## Budgeting Concerns {#sect-00014}

The action plans outlined in the section above should enable you to make
a supporting marketing budget that is essentially a projected
profit-and-loss (P&L) statement. If you've previously taken an
accounting course, you'll know that a P&L statement summarizes the
revenues, costs, and expenses incurred during a specified period.

On the revenue side, this statement should indicate that forecasted
number of units to be sold during the period outlined in the marketing
plan and the average net price for revenues. On the expense side, this
statement should indicate the cost of production, physical distribution,
and marketing expenditures.

## Controls to Monitor Progress {#sect-00015}

Controls is the last section of the marketing plan. This section will
outline the control methods that will be utilized to monitor the action
programs outlined in the plan. The reason you'll want to monitor these
metrics during the time period of the marketing plan is to see where
things may have fallen outside the desired range, at which time you'll
want to dig into the details, perform an analysis of the root cause of
the problem(s), and make adjustments to get back on track.

:::: {#note-00013 .note}
::: title
Marketing Plans
:::

There are numerous online examples of marketing plans. To be a great
marketer, it would be wise to review and study marketing plans and how
they tell a unique company story. Here are several to check out:

Shopify blog:

"7 Inspiring Marketing Plan Examples (and How You Can Implement Them)"

University of Illinois

Visit Baton Rouge

Bizfluent example for a

generic restaurant

There's also a [free marketing plan template available from HubSpot](#).
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00016}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00017}

:::: {#rf-052 .note}
::: title
:::

52\.

"Company," Pinterest Newsroom, Pinterest, accessed August 5, 2022,
https://newsroom.pinterest.com/en/company; "Press," All about Pinterest,
Pinterest, accessed August 5, 2022,
https://about.pinterest.com/en/node/19/mailto%3Apress%40pinterest.com.
::::

:::: {#rf-053 .note}
::: title
:::

53\.

"16 of the Best Company Mission Statement Examples for Inspiration,"

Biteable Blog

, Biteable, last modified April 5, 2022,
https://biteable.com/blog/mission-statements/.
::::

:::: {#rf-054 .note}
::: title
:::

54\.

"Mission, Values and Public Purposes," About the BBC, BBC, accessed
August 5, 2022, https://www.bbc.com/aboutthebbc/governance/mission.
::::

:::: {#rf-055 .note}
::: title
:::

55\.

Jonas Sickler and Patrick Lane, "9 Examples of Buyer Personas for B2B &
B2C Brands,"

SEO Blog

, Terakeet, June 12, 2020,
https://terakeet.com/blog/buyer-persona-examples/.
::::

:::: {#rf-056 .note}
::: title
:::

56\.

Boz V., "How Many Personas Are Too Many?," LinkedIn, May 3, 2016,
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/how-many-personas-too-boz-zou/.
::::

:::: {#rf-057 .note}
::: title
:::

57\.

"Marketing Plan Current Situation Section," Resources for Entrepreneurs,
Gaebler Ventures, accessed April 20, 2022,
https://www.gaebler.com/Marketing-Plan-Current-Situation.htm.
::::

:::: {#rf-058 .note}
::: title
:::

58\.

"Marketing Plan: Contents of a Marketing Plan," iEduNote, last modified
October 12, 2020, https://www.iedunote.com/marketing-plan.
::::

:::: {#rf-059 .note}
::: title
:::

59\.

Clint Fontanella, "The Straightforward Guide to Product Strategy,"

The HubSpot Customer Service Blog

, HubSpot, updated March 17, 2022,
https://blog.hubspot.com/service/product-strategy.
::::

:::: {#rf-060 .note}
::: title
:::

60\.

"How to Develop the Pricing Strategy for Your Marketing Plan,"

PriceBeam Blog

, PriceBeam, February 7, 2017,
https://blog.pricebeam.com/pricing-strategy-marketing-plan.
::::

:::: {#rf-061 .note}
::: title
:::

61\.

iEduNote, "Marketing Plan."
::::

# 

buyer persona

a semi-fictional representation of your ideal customers based on data
and research

executive summary

a brief overview of a marketing plan

product positioning

strategic exercise that defines where a product or service fits in the
marketplace
