m00018

a969758f-8bcb-4773-bbcd-1cb213458579

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define marketing metrics.

Explain key performance indicators (KPIs).

Provide examples of business objective KPIs.

Characterize sales/revenue generation KPIs.

Provide examples of market share KPIs.

Classify and discuss customer support KPIs.

# Marketing Metrics Explained {#sect-00002}

There can be a lot of moving parts when running even a modest-sized
organization. It is often helpful to focus on key measurable
(quantifiable) values or variables that marketers aim to achieve within
a specified period of time---known as marketing metrics. In the same way
that a doctor measures height, weight, temperature, blood pressure, etc.
to assess the health of a patient, a marketer uses marketing metrics to
measure marketing performance.

# Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) Explained {#sect-00003}

Have you ever pondered what life was like without the Internet? You can
instantly type a term into a search engine, and within seconds, you'll
have hundreds of thousands (or even millions) of results. It's estimated
that, as of 2020, there was 40 zettabytes of data available on the
Internet. (If you're curious, a zettabyte is approximately 1 trillion
gigabytes). That's both a blessing and a curse. There's so much
information out there that sometimes it becomes difficult to focus on
the information you really need.

The same is true with marketing metrics. On one hand, a marketer can
examine virtually every single aspect of the customer journey, gleaning
a fully detailed picture of what is going on in every stage; on the
other hand, the sheer amount of data the metrics can yield can be
overwhelming. Metrics tell us what is happening at any point in time
without context as to why it is happening. That's why savvy marketers
should have a solid understanding of metrics to draw out the full story.
The way the marketer gets to the marketing metrics that yield the
information that's needed is by identifying and maintaining a focus on
the data that counts---the business's key performance indicators (KPIs).

Although the terms *metrics* and *KPIs* are often used interchangeably,
there is a subtle and very important difference. Metrics measure the
performance of a particular process; KPIs are directly tied to business
objectives and have targets and specific time frames for achieving those
targets. In a nutshell, think about KPIs as being a "scorecard" for
company health.

Marketers typically establish goals and objectives related to KPIs,
because it's an easy way to track progress. If the metrics remain within
the forecasted range, marketers can focus on other more troubling
elements of the SBU. On the other hand, when the metrics fall outside of
the desired range, it's time to closely examine where the trolley is
coming off the tracks, perform a root cause analysis, and make
adjustments to get back on track.

The trend in marketing is to use real-time marketing dashboards that
provide instant visibility of the metrics you've selected to track. It's
a quick and easy overview of where you stand and how you're progressing
toward your goals. It's also a huge time saver because instead of poring
over spreadsheets and multipage reports to assess progress, a marketer
can simply refer to the dashboard to obtain the information needed.

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
KPIs
:::

For more information about marketing KPIs, take a look at this brief
video from SMA Marketing about why marketing KPIs are vital for a
business. Here are additional resources you may find helpful to learn
about KPIs:

[Digital Marketing KPIs: What They Are Why They Matter](#)

Toucan Toco: "

The Most Important KPIs to Track for Improved Marketing Efficiency

"

Vital: "

The 16 Marketing KPIs You Should Be Measuring (but Probably Aren't)"

HubSpot: "

15 Key Performance Indicators to Help Improve Your Marketing"

Marketo Engage blog: "

Prove Your Worth: 10 KPIs for Marketers

"
::::

# Examples of Business Objective KPIs {#sect-00004}

There is a multitude of KPIs that marketers can choose to manage
business objectives. The actual KPIs that are selected depend on the
nature of the process, the type of information available, and the team.
The important concept is to identify the "key" indicators that drive
success. Instead of trying to develop information from a laundry list of
300 KPIs, it's preferable to identify a handful of the most useful KPIs
that allow for the effective management of information. In other words,
sometimes less is more, and instead of sifting through mountains of
statistics (remember all those zettabytes of information on the
Internet), you can choose from a small subset of measurements to review
on a regular basis. Let's take a look at a few that you may wish to
consider, as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

## Total Sales/Revenue {#sect-00005}

Sales and revenue growth is a KPI that is used to determine whether
sales and revenue are increasing or decreasing over a specified time
period. It's calculated by dividing revenue generated during one time
period by revenue generated over a subsequent time period, subtracting
1, and then multiplying by 100 to obtain a percentage. Here is the
formula:

$${Sales}\operatorname{}{versus}\operatorname{}{Revenue}\operatorname{} = \operatorname{}\left( {\frac{2022\operatorname{}{Revenue}}{2021\operatorname{}{Revenue}} - 1} \right)~ \times ~100 = xx\%$$

For the sake of putting numbers to the formula so you can see how it
actually works, let's assume that 2022 revenue was \$1.8 billion,
compared to \$1.4 billion in 2021. If we populate the formula with these
numbers, it looks like this:

$$\begin{matrix}
{{Sales}~{versus}~{Revenue}~} & = & {~\left( \frac{\$ 1.8B}{\$ 1.4B} \right)~ = ~1.2857} \\
{1.2857~ - ~1~} & = & {~0.2857} \\
{0.2857~ \times ~100~} & = & {~28.57\%~{Revenue}~{Growth}}
\end{matrix}$$

As a general rule, the metric would be used to suggest revenue growth
over a year time span. However, for companies whose revenue is affected
by seasonality (such as companies that produce snow blowers or bathing
suits), it may make more sense to measure growth in revenue on a monthly
or seasonal basis, as compared to the previous season.

## New/Incremental Sales Revenue {#sect-00006}

Marketers are also keenly interested in understanding how many new
versus how many repeat customers a business has. The bottom line is that
it's typically more expensive to acquire initial sales than repeat
sales, and repeat customers (referrals) can serve as a powerful source
of new customers. Accordingly, if the majority of sales are from return
customers, that may point to a sign of weakness in a promotional program
or other marketing activity.

## Profitability {#sect-00007}

Gross margin as a percentage of sales is one of the most closely watched
KPIs at most organizations. Gross margin is the percentage of sales
revenue that the company can convert into gross profit, and it's
generally a good measure of how efficiently the company generates gross
profit from sales of products or services.

It stands to reason that if the gross margin of a product is negative,
it's going to be difficult to make money at *any* level of sales. Thus,
the higher the gross margin, all other elements being equal, the less
sales are required to break even.

# Examples of Sales/Revenue Generation KPIs {#sect-00008}

One of the most important metrics for any organization concerns
sales/revenue. Let's look at some of the KPIs that can be helpful to
marketers, as illustrated in [\#](#).

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

## Average Revenue per Customer (ARPC) {#sect-00009}

This KPI measures the amount of money that a company expects to generate
from an individual customer, and it's a relatively simple calculation:
total revenue divided by the number of customers. Where this KPI comes
in handy is that it assists the marketer in identifying trends among
different time periods and segments of customers. A low ARPC score can
point to a number of reasons: you're not targeting the right customer,
or perhaps your product offering is priced too low. So marketers need to
determine how to extract more revenue from the product---whether through
different value add-on products or perhaps by targeting a more valuable
customer base.

## New Customer Acquisition {#sect-00010}

As the term suggests, customer acquisition refers to bringing in new
customers. It's the action of bringing customers down the "marketing
funnel" from brand awareness to the purchase decision. Closely related
to this KPI is customer acquisition cost (CAC)---in other words, the
total cost of acquiring those customers, which is calculated by adding
up the cost of sales and marketing efforts and then divided by the
number of new customers acquired during a specific period.

## Customer Retention Rates {#sect-00011}

As we pointed out above, it's cheaper to keep a customer than it is to
find a new customer. The KPI for customer retention rates measures the
percentage of customers in the current period who have purchased in the
past. This KPI is particularly powerful when the product or service is
subscription based, or requires a regular recurring purchase (e.g., cell
phone monthly fee, electricity bill, etc.).

# Examples of Market Share KPIs {#sect-00012}

Of course, it's important to track the sales/revenue KPIs mentioned
above, but they don't tell the whole story. It's also important to track
how the organization is faring in the marketplace compared to its
competitors.

Let's consider a scenario to explain this further. Let's assume that
your organization is in a highly competitive, fast-growing industry.
Your marketing dashboard shows that your organization's sales increased
10 percent during the last fiscal year. On the surface, that might be a
positive---who doesn't want sales to increase by 10 percent? However,
with the right KPIs on your marketing dashboard, you might begin to see
that all isn't as good as you initially surmised because the market in
general grew at 20 percent during that same period and the sales of your
major competitor grew 25 percent. That paints a different picture,
doesn't it?

So, let's examine some market share KPIs that can paint a broader
picture for marketers.

## Market Share in Category {#sect-00013}

A company's market share in category (sometimes known as category share)
is its sales as a percentage of all products in a category that the
company sells. It is calculated by dividing the company's sales by the
total sales in a category. For most companies, market share is an
important KPI because it easily translates into positive or negative
performance. For example, increases in market share typically indicate
that a company is doing more business, whereas declining market share
suggests an undesirable outcome.

## Relative Market Share {#sect-00014}

Relative market share indexes a firm's or brand's market share against
that of its leading competitor. It's more complicated that industry
market share because it compares your organization to your rivals rather
than to the industry as a whole. How is it calculated? That's best
explained using an example. Let's assume that you own an appliance store
in town, one of a handful of stores in town that sell major appliances.
Your sales bring in \$1 million per year, for a 5 percent market share.
Now imagine that the top appliance store in the area sells \$1.5 million
worth of major appliances a year, an 8 percent market share. To
determine your relative market share compared to this competitor, divide
your share by the competitor's:

$$5\%~ \div ~8\%~ = ~66\%~{Relative}~{Market}~{Share}$$

To get an even more in-depth picture, you can do the same for the
smaller competitors in the market. This process would give you a
slightly different perspective on market share growth. For example, in
some competitive markets, a 5 percent share might make you one of the
major players; however, in the example shown with the appliance stores,
it appears that you're a long way from achieving the market share of
your leading competitor.

# Examples of Customer Support KPIs {#sect-00015}

In a perfect world, companies would have products with zero defects and
the same number of customer issues with those products. However, we all
know we don't live in a perfect world, and zero defects and zero
customer issues simply aren't a realistic expectation. There will be
customer issues, and the key to retaining loyal clients is identifying
and resolving those issues quickly. So let's look at some customer
support KPIs that matter to marketers, as illustrated in [\#](#).

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

## Customer Satisfaction Score {#sect-00016}

Customer satisfaction score (also known as CSAT) is the primary metric
used to measure customer satisfaction. One way to measure CSAT is by
sending out a customer satisfaction survey asking customers to rate
their satisfaction on a scale of 1 to 5, with 1 being very unsatisfied
and 5 being very satisfied. The calculation from that point is simple:
take the number of satisfied customers (i.e., those who rated their
satisfaction as either 4 or 5), divide that by the total number of
responses, and finally multiple that number by 100. That formula will
yield the percentage of customers who consider themselves
satisfied---your CSAT score.

Let's put some numbers to this formula to illustrate the point. Imagine
that you've emailed a customer satisfaction survey to 15,000 customers
and received 1,500 responses. Of those responses, 308 customers rated
their satisfaction as "very satisfied," 447 rated their satisfaction as
"satisfied," and the remaining 745 customers rated their satisfaction as
"neutral," "dissatisfied," or "very dissatisfied." The calculation of
the CSAT score would look like this:

$$(308~ + ~447)~ \div ~1,500~ = ~50.33\%$$

## Customer Resolution Rate {#sect-00017}

As we pointed out above, no matter how carefully you've planned and no
matter how well you've trained your staff, things will inevitably go
wrong with customers at some point. That's the harsh reality of dealing
with customers. However, most (or at least many) customers will forgive
a mistake if the organization acts quickly to resolve the problem to the
best of its ability. Once again, the calculation for this KPI is
relatively uncomplicated. To calculate customer resolution rate,
subtract the number of unresolved cases from the total number of cases,
and then divide the sum by the total number of cases. The fewer
unresolved cases, the higher your customer resolution rate.

## Customer Resolution Time {#sect-00018}

Closely related to the customer resolution rate is customer resolution
time because most customers expect immediate assistance. The longer it
takes to resolve a customer issue, the less satisfied a customer will
be. There are a couple of ways to calculate this. First, you could
measure average resolution time by taking the sum of all case resolution
durations and then dividing by the total number of customer cases.
Alternatively, you could measure the first response time. This is the
average time it takes from the time a customer reaches out for
assistance and the length of time it takes for a customer service
representative to respond.

:::: {#note-00015 .note}
::: title
Classic Cleaners and Automated Reporting
:::

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

Classic Cleaners is a provider of dry cleaning and laundry services
based in Indianapolis, Indiana (see [\#](#)). The company has 17
locations. Like many businesses, Classic Cleaners always struggled with
the question, What does my customer *really* want? The company wanted an
easy solution to using real-time marketing to track and measure results
and obtain insights that would aid it in making data-driven decisions.

Enter TBH Creative, which was hired by Classic Cleaners to transform its
marketing efforts through automating reporting. TBH Creative worked with
the company to set up a marketing dashboard to monitor statistics and
analytics, complete an audit to determine which marketing efforts were
effective, improve its website, and more.

As Classic Cleaners' General Manager Steve Arnold stated, "We . . .
wanted to start tracking our customers more thoroughly so we could
identify who our target customers are, what types of messaging resonates
with them, and how we could use marketing to earn more business from
these customers."
::::

:::: {#note-00019 .note}
::: title
Customer Lifetime Value (CLV)
:::

Customers are not all the same. Some customers spend more money than
others, while others are customers for long periods. As marketers, we
want to know how much value to expect from customer groups to determine
their value to the organization and how much we should be spending to
attract and retain customers. Customer lifetime value (CLV) provides an
estimate of how much a single customer is worth to a company over their
customer life span. Unlike other marketing metrics, customer lifetime
value is a forward-looking metric. Therefore, it is an estimate, not a
guarantee.

Customer lifetime value is closely related to customer acquisition cost,
which is the amount an organization invests in attracting a new
customer. We want our customer lifetime value to exceed the customer
acquisition cost to ensure that we are not spending more money to
attract a customer than they are worth. However, we also know that
customers have additional costs, such as our cost of goods sold or cost
to serve. These costs must be calculated along with customer lifetime
value to determine whether our customers are profitable. We also know
that retaining current customers is important so that we are not
continually investing in customer acquisition. To invest in existing
customers, companies may introduce loyalty programs, increase customer
experience, design positive user experiences, and/or connect with
customers on social media.

A simple formula for customer lifetime value is:

$$\begin{matrix}
{{Customer}~{Lifetime}~{Value}} & = & \left( {Annual}~{Profit}~{per}~{Customer} \right. \\
 & \times & {\left. {Average}~{Number}~{of}~{Years}~{Retained} \right)~} \\
 & - & {{Customer}~{Acquisition}~{Cost}}
\end{matrix}~{~}~$$

The annual profit per customer considers the cost of goods sold and
customer acquisition cost.

*Give the customer lifetime value calculation a try for yourself. What
is the customer lifetime value for each of the four segments in the
example shown in Table 2.1?*

  *Person*                       *Annual Profit Per Customer*   *Average Number of Years Retained*   *Customer Acquisition Cost*
  ------------------------------ ------------------------------ ------------------------------------ -----------------------------
  Millennial parents             \$10,000                       12                                   \$750
  Millennial singles             \$18,000                       12                                   \$750
  Working moms                   \$22,000                       8                                    \$1,200
  Gen Z emerging professionals   \$34,000                       2                                    \$1,600

Millennial parents: \$119,250

Millennial singles: \$215,250

Working moms: \$174,800

Gen Z emerging professionals: \$66,400

*Which segment would you choose if you were tasked with starting a new
campaign that maximized CLV?*

Millennial singles have the highest CLV.

*Let's suppose the customer experience team could increase the average
number of years that the Gen Z segment retains from two to eight. Which
segment would then have the highest CLV?*

Gen Z would have the highest CLV at \$270,400.
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00019}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00020}

:::: {#rf-062 .note}
::: title
:::

62\.

"A Community of 4.6 Billion,"

Tech Blog

, Health IT, last modified September 20, 2021,
https://healthit.com.au/how-big-is-the-internet-and-how-do-we-measure-it/.
::::

:::: {#rf-063 .note}
::: title
:::

63\.

Zoe Palmer, "KPIs vs. Marketing Metrics: What's the Difference?," Brand
Chemistry, last modified August 25, 2020,
https://www.brandchemistry.com.au/blog/kpis-vs-marketing-metrics.
::::

:::: {#rf-064 .note}
::: title
:::

64\.

"5 Benefits of Dashboards in the Marketing Industry," InfoCaptor BI,
Rudrasoft, March 13, 2017,
https://www.infocaptor.com/5-benefits-of-dashboards-in-the-marketing-industry.
::::

:::: {#rf-065 .note}
::: title
:::

65\.

"KPI of the Week: Revenue Growth," News & Publications, Porte Brown
Accountants & Advisors, accessed June 5, 2022,
https://www.portebrown.com/news/kpi-of-the-week-revenue-growth.
::::

:::: {#rf-066 .note}
::: title
:::

66\.

Porte Brown Accountants & Advisors, "KPI of the Week."
::::

:::: {#rf-067 .note}
::: title
:::

67\.

"What Is Average Revenue per User (ARPU) and How to Calculate It," Peel
Insights, accessed June 4, 2022,
https://www.peelinsights.com/post/what-is-average-revenue-per-user-and-how-to-calculate-it.
::::

:::: {#rf-068 .note}
::: title
:::

68\.

"Market Share," Encyclopedia Table of Contents,

Inc.

, updated February 6, 2020,
https://www.inc.com/encyclopedia/market-share.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-069 .note}
::: title
:::

69\.

"Evaluating Market Share as a KPI," Insights, Ungerboeck, updated
January 18, 2021,
https://ungerboeck.com/resources/evaluating-market-share-as-a-kpi.
::::

:::: {#rf-070 .note}
::: title
:::

70\.

Fraser Sherman, "How Do You Calculate a Company's Relative Market
Share?," Small Business, Chron.com, updated September 24, 2020,
https://smallbusiness.chron.com/calculate-companys-relative-market-share-11401.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-071 .note}
::: title
:::

71\.

Sherman, "How Do You Calculate?"
::::

:::: {#rf-072 .note}
::: title
:::

72\.

"How to Measure Customer Satisfaction KPIs," Resource Center,
GetFeedback, last modified January 20, 2022,
https://www.getfeedback.com/resources/csat/how-to-measure-customer-satisfaction-kpis/.
::::

:::: {#rf-073 .note}
::: title
:::

73\.

Andrea Paul, "Top Metrics and Strategies for How to Measure Customer
Service Performance,"

Kustomer Blog

, Kustomer, last modified December 2, 2021,
https://www.kustomer.com/blog/how-to-measure-customer-service-performance/.
::::

:::: {#rf-074 .note}
::: title
:::

74\.

Paul, "Top Metrics and Strategies."
::::

:::: {#rf-075 .note}
::: title
:::

75\.

"Locations," Classic Cleaners, accessed August 5, 2022,
https://classiccleaners.com/locations/.
::::

:::: {#rf-076 .note}
::: title
:::

76\.

"Case Study: Company Tracks Performance with Marketing Reporting
Dashboard,"

Perspective, Tips, and Insights

(blog), TBH Creative, February 4, 2020,
https://blog.tbhcreative.com/2020/02/case-study-marketing-reporting-dashboard.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-077 .note}
::: title
:::

77\.

TBH Creative, "Case Study."
::::

# 

customer acquisition cost

the amount an organization invests in attracting a new customer

customer lifetime value (CLV)

an estimate of how much a single customer is worth to a company over
their customer life span

key performance indicators (KPIs)

quantifiable measure gauging a company's performance against a set of
targets, objectives, or competitors

marketing metrics

what marketers use to monitor, record, and measure progress over time;
are varied and can change from platform to platform
