m00019

03bd5e45-3437-4c08-80a8-f4d61851bcec

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Explain the importance of ethical marketing.

Describe key ethical considerations in strategic planning.

Discuss examples of ethical companies.

# The Importance of Ethical Marketing {#sect-00002}

Marketing ethics are essentially the moral guidelines that allow
companies to scrutinize their marketing strategies and actions. It means
that a marketer has an obligation to ensure that all marketing
activities adhere to core ethical principles, such as integrity and
honesty---both internally and externally.

As we'll see below, ethical marketing is a crucial factor in an
organization's overall growth over time, and it produces many benefits:

Customer Loyalty.

Every company wants customers who keep coming back to buy their products
and services. Companies have learned over time that, with the adoption
of common-sense ethics in marketing, they can more easily earn the trust
of consumers.

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Improved Credibility.

Look beyond customers when considering this factor and think in terms of
the respect and credibility an ethical company earns with its investors,
competitors, and other parties.

Brand Enhancement.

Consumers, competitors, investors, and others have begun to look beyond
product features and pursue brands that consider the three Ps of
sustainability---people, planet, and profits.

## Millennials and Generation Z: Purchases Follow Beliefs {#sect-00003}

During the American Industrial Revolution in the early 1900s, the United
States saw the rise of iconic business enterprises like Ford, US Steel,
J.P. Morgan, Union Pacific Railroad, and many others. Some (a few) gave
generously to charitable causes. Others made their wealth using
unscrupulous means, exploiting labor and using questionable business
practices.

Corporate social responsibility (CSR) is the concept that a company
should integrate social and environmental concerns into its business
operations and practices. It didn't begin to take hold in the United
States until the 1970s. In 1971, the Committee for Economic Development
released a policy statement declaring the concept of a "social contract"
between business and society, wherein the business has an obligation to
constructively serve the needs of society. This concept was further
fueled in part by President George H. W. Bush's call for a "thousand
points of light." The bottom line is that CSR changed business as usual.
Today, Fortune Global 500 firms spend approximately \$20 billion on CSR
initiatives each year, and companies take public positions on diversity,
inclusion, education, and the environment.

We are witnessing an evolution in consumer expectations as consumers
begin to vote with their wallets. Millennials (those born between 1981
and 1996) and Generation Z (those born between 1997 and 2012) are now
the biggest global generation, making up 65 percent of the world's
population, so it stands to reason that, as these generational cohorts
enter their prime spending years, many companies have begun to focus
their marketing efforts on this segment of the population. What
marketers have discovered is that millennials and Zoomers (aka Gen Z)
engage with brands differently than older generations like Generation X
(born between 1965 and 1980) and the baby boomers (born between 1946 and
1964). They're more likely to steer clear of mass-market branded
products in favor of smaller, eco-friendly brands. They are the most
likely to make buying decisions on values and principles. For example,
consider some statistics from a First Insight report that shows that 62
percent of both millennials and Zoomers are willing to spend more for
sustainable products, compared with only 54 percent of Gen X and 39
percent of Baby Boomers.

Nielsen, the information, data, and marketing firm, surveyed over 30,000
consumers in 60 countries to find out what influences and affects their
buying habits. The results were somewhat amazing:

66 percent of global consumers are willing to pay more for sustainable
products.

:::: {#note-00008 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

73 percent (nearly three out of four) of millennials indicated that they
would be willing to pay extra for sustainable goods.

:::: {#note-00009 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

What implications does this have for marketing to these generations? The
bottom line is that CSR is more than just a buzzword for these
generational cohorts. To make an impact, companies need to use their
resources to show---not just tell---these younger generations how
business enterprises are making an impact through authenticity and
transparency.

# Key Ethical Considerations in Strategic Planning {#sect-00004}

It's no secret that the primary goal of marketers is to increase growth
by creating and maintaining customers. However, sometimes pursuing that
growth to satisfy shareholder goals to the exclusion of other groups
(like customers) has led to high-profile ethical dilemmas. Let's
consider a few:

According to a Gallup poll in 2021, approximately 6 percent of US adults
report that they have used e-cigarettes within the past week despite
health warnings about vaping. The sale and distribution of e-cigarettes
is banned or regulated in a growing number of countries much to the
dismay of vaping aficionados. Where do you draw the line? Is vaping a
matter of personal choice, or are people influenced by the marketing
efforts of e-cigarette producers like Juul?

Consider the ethical implications behind this. Should e-cigarette
manufacturers sell customers what they crave, or should they tailor
their offerings based on what health experts say? Who gets to make that
choice? Does the decision fall to the consumer, the producer, a public
watchdog group, or the federal government?

Consider another ethical issue. During the first decade of the new
millennium, Toyota vehicles experienced problems with unintended,
uncontrolled acceleration that prompted over 6,200 complaints to the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and were linked to more
than 89 deaths over the next five years. Early on, Toyota blamed driver
error. Later, it issued recalls to address floor mats that pinned down
accelerators in some cases. But the company hid a flawed gas pedal
design and lied to regulators, Congress, and the public for years about
the sudden acceleration problem, ultimately leading to a fine of \$1.2
billion by the Justice Department, which contended that Toyota's efforts
to conceal the problem and protect its "corporate image" led to a series
of preventable fatalities. The settlement is being called the largest
criminal penalty imposed on a car company in US history.

Could these situations have been avoided with a stronger ethical focus
and an eye toward the greater good? It all starts with the strategic
planning process, which can be used to build "good" into the core of the
organization.

## Broader Participation {#sect-00005}

As pointed out in [Marketing and Customer Value](#), an organization
must consider all parties that it might impact, including investors,
communities, governments, customers, employees, and suppliers. In the
context of corporate social responsibility, this means that leaders of
companies must create value for all of these groups while simultaneously
producing a fair return for shareholders or owners.

## Organizational and Individual Values {#sect-00006}

When considering organizational and individual values, the marketer
needs to ask (and answer candidly) the following questions:

Does the organization's mission reflect current activities that are
focused on the triple bottom line?

Does the organization's vision statement lead to outcomes that contain
elements of social good?

Do the organization's values reflect respect for one another, the
community, and the environment?

Are those values authentic, and do members of the organization live by
them daily?

Has the organization included goals and objectives that refer
specifically to elements of social good?

These questions can help inform the organization's activities as it
works through the strategic planning process. Thoughtful analysis and
design at this stage can build strong organizations that not only
deliver profits but also produce positive social outcomes for *all*
parties.

#  {#sect-00007}

This chapter explores the topic of marketing strategy in more detail.
Strategy starts with understanding where a company is, where it wants to
go, what the operating environment looks like, and what tools it has to
work with or could acquire. The foundation of who a company is is
established based on the vision, mission, values, and goals and
objectives of the organization.

The vast majority of organizations have a single product line or market
focus. However, there are circumstances where a company may view its
enterprise as consisting of a portfolio of products or operating units.
In this chapter, we explore tools such as SWOT analysis and the BCG
matrix that can help a company organize and analyze its portfolio.

We need to define a strategy for our organization whether we have one
product or dozens. The strategy selected for each product line or
business unit does not have to be the same. We explored strategies
associated with market penetration, market development, product
development, and diversification.

A well-known saying asserts, "If you fail to plan, you are planning to
fail." This chapter explores the motivation for creating a formal
marketing plan and the elements that should be included. The chapter
also explores KPIs and the metrics required to organize, monitor, and
manage an organization. The chapter finishes with a discussion of
ethics, especially in terms of how authenticity, social justice, and
doing business for good resonate with millennials and the Generation Z
demographic.

#  {#sect-00008}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00009}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00010}

There are many brands that recognize the benefits of hiring brand
ambassadors. Red Bull is one of these brands. Because college students
constitute a major portion of its target market, Red Bull relies on
student ambassadors (also called Marketeers) to interact with customers.
According to Red Bull's Student Marketeer website, "student Marketeers
are in direct contact with various consumers and customers, inviting
product trial, helping establish Red Bull consumption in diverse
occasions, supporting our sales teams, working with renowned athletes
and of course ensuring an unforgettable brand experience for consumers
at Red Bull events. Based on your skills, knowledge, experience and
availability, your focus will be either on your campus or you'll cover
the entire region on board the iconic Mini."

Identify another brand that follows the strategy of welcoming brand
ambassadors and express how finding this sort of part-time job might
enhance your own brand.

#  {#sect-00011}

Consider the city where you live. Why do you live there? Why have
businesses chosen to locate there? Call your Chamber of Commerce and ask
to speak to the chamber director or marketing director. Ask the
following questions:

Have you used strategic planning to explore growth opportunities?

What are the strengths of our city that you express to Chamber members
or businesses considering relocating here?

Have there been any changes in politics, culture, ecology, or technology
that offer opportunities to attract businesses to this community?

Are there weaknesses or threats that our city must overcome to improve
its growth and viability?

How do college students contribute to the strengths of our city or
overcome workforce threats?

#  {#sect-00012}

Complete the following information about the company and
products/services you chose to focus on as you develop the marketing
plan throughout the course. You may need to conduct research in order to
obtain necessary information.

Instructions: Using the Marketing Plan Template file you created from
the [Marketing and Customer Value](#) assignment, complete the following
sections of your marketing plan:

Executive Summary

Mission Statement

SWOT Analysis

Marketing Goals and Objectives

Submit the marketing plan to your instructor for grading and feedback.

#  {#sect-00013}

## Blue Zones {#sect-00014}

When adventurer Dan Buettner set off around the world, riding his bike
and visiting far-off destinations, he put a way of living into motion.
Through the study of various communities around the world, Dan
discovered pockets where populations of older people seemed to be living
longer than anywhere else on earth. There were five such places where
people lived a very long time and were healthier than many of the
world's people. Dan called these places "Blue Zones." The Blue Zones
included Okinawa, Japan; Sardinia, Italy; Nicoya, Costa Rica; Ikaria,
Greece, and Loma Linda, California.

The Blue Zone concept grew and developed through the work of Gianni Pes
and Michel Poulain. They originally identified Sardinia as a part of the
world where there was a high concentration of older men. As the two
began mapping the regions of longevity, they highlighted the villages
and termed the inner circle of them "Blue Zones."

"Dan and the team of demographers and researchers found that all blue
zone areas share nine specific lifestyle habits that they call the Power
9."

*The Blue Zones* became a New York Times best seller. Media attention
followed, and soon there was increased interest in the lifestyles within
the Blue Zones. People began to recognize the Blue Zones as the happiest
places to live. Communities were looking for ways to emulate the
lifestyles and successes of these regions and in turn boost their
longevity.

Dan realized he had not only a business, but a mission. What would
happen if Blue Zones were created around the world? What if every
community became a Blue Zone and a happy and healthy place where people
lived longer? Could chronic disease be eradicated? Would health care
costs drop?

In 2009, Albert Lea, Minnesota, teamed up with Blue Zones by applying
the same concepts seen in the other Blue Zone locations. The location
was suffering a severe economic crisis and needed a strategy to get out
of it.

What do these communities get for signing on to be a structured Blue
Zone? Lower obesity rates, smoking cessation, increased exercise among
their populations, reduced health care expenses, and a happier and more
productive community. The initiatives are incredibly effective at making
changes in how people live, work, and play. The Blue Zones project is
population health at work. Adopting Blue Zones is creating a culture and
community of complete well-being---one in which the people have
increased productivity due to less illness.

Creating these communities includes a phased in approach. Blue Zones
starts with Phases I and II, which build the foundation. Through
assessment and an understanding of current state and desired future
state, the gaps and issues are identified. The plan is drawn, and then
in Phase III there is a full transformation that includes the people,
the places, and the policy. When the plan is fully accepted and
implemented, people will enjoy longevity, lower health care costs, and
the recognition that the community is a great place to live and work.

How does the Blue Zones process work for the communities that
participate? The effort is a collaboration between the community and the
Blue Zones team. Starting with a complete evaluation of the community,
Blue Zones experts work with community leaders and residents to assess
the current state of well-being. Understanding the challenges currently
facing the community provides the team with the greatest opportunity to
develop the opportunities that will transform the community.

The statistics speak for themselves. Now communities across the United
States are working to find ways to combat the crippling effects of the
nation's health care crisis. Blue Zones could be the answer. "The Blue
Zones Project helped our community set amazing, aggressive, and
achievable strategies that moved the Public Health agenda further in 10
months than what I could have expected in 10 years," said Lois Ahern,
director of Freeborn County Health (retired), in Albert Lea.

## Case Questions {#sect-00015}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00016}

:::: {#rf-078 .note}
::: title
:::

78\.

Shivani, "Marketing Ethics: Meaning, Importance, and Examples,"
InviteReferrals, December 14, 2021,
https://www.invitereferrals.com/blog/marketing-ethics/.
::::

:::: {#rf-079 .note}
::: title
:::

79\.

Shivani, "Marketing Ethics."
::::

:::: {#rf-080 .note}
::: title
:::

80\.

"Corporate Social Responsibility: A Brief History," Association of
Corporate Citizenship Professionals, last modified April 21, 2022,
https://accp.org/resources/csr-resources/accp-insights-blog/corporate-social-responsibility-brief-history/.
::::

:::: {#rf-081 .note}
::: title
:::

81\.

John Edelman, "George H. W. Bush's Impact on CSR," Insights, Edelman,
December 5, 2018,
https://www.edelman.com/insights/george-hw-bush-impact-csr.
::::

:::: {#rf-082 .note}
::: title
:::

82\.

Michael Ledecky, "Corporate Social Responsibility: Past, Present, and
Future,"

Resources to Engage Your Cause

(blog), EVERFI, last modified July 20, 2022,
https://everfi.com/blog/community-engagement/csr-history/.
::::

:::: {#rf-083 .note}
::: title
:::

83\.

Submittable, "Millennials, Gen Z, and the Rising Demand for Corporate
Social Responsibility," American Marketing Association, July 6, 2020,
https://www.ama.org/2020/07/06/millennials-gen-z-and-the-rising-demand-for-corporate-social-responsibility/.
::::

:::: {#rf-084 .note}
::: title
:::

84\.

Submittable, "Millennials, Gen Z."
::::

:::: {#rf-085 .note}
::: title
:::

85\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-086 .note}
::: title
:::

86\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-087 .note}
::: title
:::

87\.

Zach Hrynowski and Megan Brenan, "What Percentage of Americans Vape?,"
Gallup News, Gallup, August 19, 2021,
https://news.gallup.com/poll/267413/percentage-americans-vape.aspx.
::::

:::: {#rf-088 .note}
::: title
:::

88\.

Meagan Parrish, "The 2009 Toyota Accelerator Scandal That Wasn't What It
Seemed," Manufacturing.net, Industrial Media, August 11, 2016,
https://www.manufacturing.net/automotive/blog/13110434/the-2009-toyota-accelerator-scandal-that-wasnt-what-it-seemed.
::::

:::: {#rf-089 .note}
::: title
:::

89\.

Danielle Douglas and Michael A. Fletcher, "Toyota Reaches \$1.2 Billion
Settlement to End Probe of Accelerator Problems,"

Washington Post

, March 19, 2014,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/toyota-reaches-12-billion-settlement-to-end-criminal-probe/2014/03/19/5738a3c4-af69-11e3-9627-c65021d6d572_story.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-091 .note}
::: title
:::

91\.

"Red Bull Student Marketeer," Red Bull Jobs, Red Bull, accessed June 4,
2022, https://jobs.redbull.com/us-en/microsite/student-marketeer.
::::

:::: {#rf-092 .note}
::: title
:::

92\.

"History of Blue Zones," Blue Zones, last modified April 30, 2021,
https://www.bluezones.com/about/history/.
::::

:::: {#rf-093 .note}
::: title
:::

93\.

"Blue Zone Results: Albert Lea, MN," Blue Zones, last modified January
8, 2019, https://www.bluezones.com/blue-zones-results-albert-lea-mn/.
::::

:::: {#rf-094 .note}
::: title
:::

94\.

Blue Zones, "History of Blue Zones."
::::

# 

corporate social responsibility (CSR)

the concept that a company should integrate social and environmental
concerns into its business operations and practices

marketing ethics

area of applied ethics dealing with the moral principles behind the
operation and regulation of marketing
