m00006

8a610f38-2d5a-46ed-8d49-3f59e4956f85

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Since its launch in 1967, Gatorade has been a power player in the sports
drink beverage category. Gatorade dominates the US sports drink market,
garnering 67.7 percent of the market, followed distantly by the
Coca-Cola Company's Powerade and BodyArmor brands at 13.7 percent and
9.3 percent, respectively. The fact that Gatorade has maintained such a
large market share demonstrates parent company PepsiCo's understanding
of the marketing mix (i.e., product, price, place, and promotion), how
to integrate these elements for its target market, and how to
continually adapt its marketing mix to meet changing consumer demands.

First, let's consider its approach to the product itself. Gatorade
managers saw the exercise boom coming as baby boomers began to age and
wanted to be the performance and thirst quencher for everyone from kids
to pros. The product, which was intended to replace electrolytes lost in
sweat, was scientifically formulated first at the University of Florida
and later at the Gatorade Sports Science Institute. But Gatorade didn't
rest on its laurels when it comes to product innovation. For example, in
order to lure back "lapsed" consumers with concerns over sugar, it
launched Gatorade Zero, a thirst quencher without sugar. It also
launched its G Series Performance, a new line of food and beverage
products designed to provide fuel, fluid, and nutrients before, during,
and after activity.

In terms of pricing, Gatorade originally priced its product using a
premium strategy because the product was unique. However, in order to
retain its lead, the company subsequently adopted competitive pricing
policies when competitors entered the market.

Gatorade has continued to pump marketing dollars into advertising
campaigns. For example, in 2020 it launched an iconic advertising
campaign that featured some of the world's "greatest of all time (GOAT)
athletes"--- the NBA's Michael Jordan, tennis star Serena Williams,
soccer legend Lionel Messi, and track star Usain Bolt. In the
commercial, the sports stars appear at a mythical setting called "GOAT
Camp," where student athletes (considered "future GOATS") can train with
these stars. Check out the GOAT camp commercial here.

[YouTube Video](#)

In 2020 Gatorade launched an impactful digital strategy. When NBA games
were canceled due to the pandemic, ESPN aired a 10-part documentary,
"The Last Dance," about Michael Jordan's last year with the Chicago
Bulls. Because Gatorade wasn't an official sponsor, it partnered with
the NBA to stream 1998's Game 6 featuring the Jazz versus the Bulls in
what would be superstar Jordan's last game with the Bulls. Gatorade
sponsored a "watch party" keyed to the hashtag #Game6Live. Review
[Gatorade's strategy on Twitter's Marketing website](#), which outlines
campaign results, opportunity, and steps taken.

Gatorade is an example of how one company built market dominance by
creating the optimal integration of its marketing mix---product, price,
place, and promotion---throughout a product's life cycle.

# Endnotes {#sect-00001}

:::: {#rf-001 .note}
::: title
:::

1\.

Rachel Arthur, "Gatorade, Powerade & BodyArmor: How PepsiCo and
Coca-Cola Are Playing in the Sports Drink Category," BeverageDaily,
William Reed, updated March 25, 2021,
https://www.beveragedaily.com/Article/2021/03/25/Gatorade-Powerade-BodyArmor-How-PepsiCo-and-Coca-Cola-are-playing-in-the-sports-drink-category.
::::

:::: {#rf-002 .note}
::: title
:::

2\.

Arthur, "Gatorade, Powerade & BodyArmor."
::::

:::: {#rf-003 .note}
::: title
:::

3\.

Darren Rovell,

First in Thirst: How Gatorade Turned the Science of Sweat into a
Cultural Phenomenon

(New York: AMACOM, 2006).
::::

:::: {#rf-004 .note}
::: title
:::

4\.

Georgie Heath, "Tennis Legend Serena Williams Stars Alongside Lionel
Messi, Michael Jordan and Usain Bolt in New Ad," NewsChain, Not a
Newspaper, February 25, 2020,
https://www.newschainonline.com/news/tennis-legend-serena-williams-stars-alongside-lionel-messi-michael-jordan-and-usain-bolt-in-new-ad-4408
::::

:::: {#rf-005 .note}
::: title
:::

5\.

"How Gatorade Ran It Back to '98 with #Game6Live," Marketing, Twitter,
accessed May 7, 2022,
https://marketing.twitter.com/en/success-stories/gatorade-game6live-twitter.
::::
