m00007

94a11eb6-7d07-438c-abb7-71dbc4f4f574

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define and describe marketing.

Describe the benefits of marketing to the organization, its interested
parties, and society.

Explain the marketing process.

# Marketing Defined {#sect-00002}

When you ask a group of people, "What's marketing?" most people will
answer "advertising" or "selling." It's true that both of these
functions are part of marketing, but marketing is also so much more. The
American Marketing Association (AMA) defines marketing as "the activity,
set of institutions, and processes for creating, communicating,
delivering, and exchanging offerings that have value for customers,
clients, partners, and society at large." That's kind of a mouthful, so
let's see if we can simplify it a bit.

At its most basic level, marketing is made up of every process involved
in moving a product or service from the organization to the consumer. It
includes discerning the needs of customers, developing products or
services to meet those needs, identifying who is likely to purchase the
products or services, promoting them, and moving them through the
appropriate distribution channels to reach those customers. Marketing,
quite simply, is about understanding what your customers want and using
that understanding to drive the business.

Marketing can also be defined as the set of activities involved in
identifying and anticipating customer needs and then attempting to
satisfy those needs profitably. But what does that really mean? Let's
break down that definition:

Identifying customer needs

. This is typically where marketing research comes in. Methods of
marketing research will be covered in a later chapter, but market
research helps a company develop a detailed picture of its customers,
including a clear understanding of their wants and needs.

Anticipating customer needs

. After analyzing the data collected, marketers can predict how products
might be changed, adapted, or updated.

Satisfying customer needs

. If marketers have done their homework correctly and clearly understand
their customers' needs, consumers will be pleased with their product
purchase and will be more likely to make additional purchases.

Profitably

. Profitability is a relatively simple term; it's when a company's
revenue is greater than its expenses. In terms of marketing, the road to
profitability means adding value to a product so that the price
customers pay is greater than the cost of making the product.

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
Reconciling Segmentation and Diversity
:::

We live in a multicultural world where diversity, equity, inclusion, and
belonging (DEIB) is no longer the "right" thing to do; rather, it's
imperative. This is particularly true in marketing, because as the
consumer population diversifies, brands have to authentically reflect a
wide range of backgrounds and life experiences in order to effectively
connect with consumers. Therefore, marketers must increasingly respect
individual preferences, celebrate differences, and promote customization
of products and services to meet customers' needs, wants, and
preferences.

At the same time, to profitably produce and sell a viable product or
service, marketers must identify potential customer groups and types
with certain characteristics in common---i.e., market segmentation.
Segmentation requires assigning individuals to predefined categories
with predictable behaviors, based on standardized assumptions.

How does segmentation differ from stereotyping? How can segmentation
support diversity?

Read the following articles to further explore these nuances:

Chron: "

Difference Between Stereotyping & Market Segmentation

"

Retail Dive: "

Segmentation is dead

!"

Spectrem Group Blog: "

Why Segmentation Is OK in Market Research Not Life

"

Keep these questions in mind as you explore Unit 2 of this book, where
you will learn more about [Market Segmentation, Targeting, and
Positioning](#) before exploring the considerations of [Marketing in a
Diverse Marketplace](#).
::::

# How Marketing Benefits the Organization, Its Interested Parties, and Society {#sect-00003}

Before we go on, let's consider all the people and groups that an
organization needs to consider and serve. Interested parties are those
persons or entities that have an interest in the success or failure of a
company. These parties can be categorized into two types: internal and
external, as shown in [\#](#). You may see these people and groups
referred to as "stakeholders" in business writing and other media.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Internal interested parties are entities that reside within the
organization and that affect---or are affected by---the actions of the
company. These entities include employees, owners, managers, and
investors (shareholders). When we think about marketing, marketers often
tend to look outward. They build strategies to engage customers and show
them what the company has to offer.

You might think that marketing would be primarily directed toward those
outside the company, like customers, but marketing is also directed
toward internal groups. Internal marketing involves promoting the
objectives, products, and services of a company to its internal
constituents---particularly employees.

Think about a recent interaction you have had with a business employee.
It could be the server who took your order at lunch or the sales
associate at a big box store who showed you the features of the new
laptop you were looking to purchase. Which interactions left you with a
positive experience? Chances are that your evaluation of the experience
is based on the interaction you had with the server or sales associate.
That's a function and benefit of good internal marketing, employees who
are motivated and empowered to deliver a satisfying customer experience.

External interested parties include those outside the company, such as
customers, creditors, suppliers, distributors, and even society at
large. External groups don't have a direct say in the company's
decision-making process. However they are vital to the success of the
company because companies can only succeed with the support of others.

How does marketing benefit external parties? First, consider what
marketing does for consumers. It draws out their needs, creates new
demand, locates untapped opportunities, and determines the possibilities
of selling new products. Second, marketing creates form, time, place,
and possession utilities for the company's goods and services. Utility
refers to a product's usefulness to customers so that they are convinced
enough to make a purchase. In other words, when you hear "utility" in
marketing, think "usefulness to customers."

Marketing creates several different types of utility:

Form utility

. Form utility refers to how well an organization can increase the value
of its product in the customer's eyes by making changes and altering its
physical appearance.

:::: {#note-00006 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

For example, when you want a donut or a pastry, you don't want to buy
the ingredients to make it; you want a donut in its final form so you
can eat it. That's where the bakery and form utility come into play. The
bakery combines flour, sugar, eggs, and other ingredients to make the
cakes, donuts, and pastries that you purchase.

Time utility

. Marketing creates time utility when it makes products and services
available to customers so that they can buy it when it is most
convenient for them. Consider how many stores are open evenings,
weekends, or even 24/7 to make it convenient for customers to shop
there!

Place utility

. Marketing creates place utility when it makes goods or services
physically available, convenient, and accessible to customers. Consider
the ease a company like

Uber Eats

adds to your life when you're craving tacos in the middle of the night
and you don't feel like getting dressed and driving to go get them. You
can have your food delivered to you!

Possession utility

. Marketers facilitate possession utility by ensuring that a product is
relatively easy to acquire. For example, many automobile manufacturers
offer low (or sometimes no) interest rates on car loans to make it easy
for you to walk out the door with a new set of car keys. Possession
utility also encompasses the pride or satisfaction you get from owning a
new product, such as a great-fitting pair of running shoes or a
smartphone with all of the features you've been wanting.

Marketing's primary benefit to society is that it drives the consumer
economy. Marketing leads to increased sales and revenue for a business
which enables them to expand operations, create more internal jobs and
external jobs for partners like suppliers. Marketing also contributes
tax revenue to local, state, and federal governments, ultimately leading
to overall economic growth.

# The Marketing Process Defined {#sect-00004}

The marketing process refers to the series of steps that assist
businesses in planning, analyzing, implementing, and adjusting their
marketing strategy. Do an internet search for "steps in the marketing
process," and you'll immediately see that some websites outline a
10-step process, whereas others propose a 4-step or 6-step process. For
our purposes, we're going to use a 5-step process.

# Steps in the Marketing Process {#sect-00005}

The 5-step process (see [\#](#)) involves understanding the marketplace
and customers, developing a marketing strategy, delivering value,
growing customer relations, and capturing value from customers.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

## Step 1: Understand Both the Marketplace and Customers {#sect-00006}

Before you can start the marketing process, you need to have a good idea
of what your marketplace looks like. This means answering some basic
questions about your customers, like who they are, their income and
purchasing power, and how much they're likely to spend (particularly on
your products or services). If you decide to sell at lower prices in
order to attain higher unit sales volume, your marketing strategy would
look very different than if you decided to sell fewer products at a
higher price.

Another way to approach this is to create separate brands and compete in
both arenas. Consider Volkswagen. You might immediately think of the VW
Beetle or the Jetta, but the company's brand portfolio extends beyond VW
passenger cars and SUVs. It's also the parent company for Audi, Bentley,
Lamborghini, Porsche, and others, and these vehicles sell at very
different price points than VW passenger cars.

## Step 2: Develop a Customer-Driven Marketing Strategy {#sect-00007}

Marketing strategy refers to a business's overall "game plan" to focus
its limited resources in order to reach prospective customers and turn
them into paying customers, hopefully for the long run.

It's said that there are two basic types of marketing strategy: a
product-driven, "build-it-and-they-will-come" strategy and a
customer-driven strategy, in which you analyze prospective consumers and
then---and only then---create something that they want or need. We're
going to focus on the latter strategy. What happens in a customer-driven
marketing strategy is that the company shifts the focus from the product
or service itself to its users. Customers' needs are the central focus
and the point of beginning, not an afterthought. Your primary goal in a
customer-driven marketing strategy is to determine what users want
and/or need and then satisfy those users. Instead of being
product-centric, it's about being customer-centric and developing a
mutually beneficial relationship with customers.

In a nutshell, it's about establishing a connection and a relationship.
It's about understanding who your customers are, what their needs and
wants are, and how you can best meet those needs and wants. It's about
knowing your target market better than your competitors do and creating
a strong value proposition for those users---a promise of value that
communicates the benefits of your company's products or services. In
short, it's what makes your product or service desirable to potential
customers, helps them understand why they should buy it, how your
company's product or service differs from those of its competitors, and
how your offerings are superior to similar offerings from your
competitors.

## Step 3: Deliver High Customer Value {#sect-00008}

Customers have myriad buying options and alternatives today. Given that,
how can a company attract and---even more importantly---retain its
customers? The answer is relatively simple: you give them value for
their money. By definition, customer value is the ratio between the
perceived benefits and costs incurred by the customer in acquiring your
products or services.

The mathematical formula is simple:

$${Value}~ = \frac{Benefits}{Price}(V = B/P)$$

But "value" from the customer's perspective is a complex term, because
we're really considering four different values types:

Functional value: what the product "does" for the customer in terms of
solving a particular want or need

Monetary value: what the product actually costs relative to its
perceived worth

Social value: how much owning the product allows the customer to connect
with others

Psychological value: how much that product allows the customer to "feel
better"

:::: {#note-00011 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Value is increased by boosting the benefits (in the form of product,
place, or promotion) or minimizing the price.

## Step 4: Grow Profitable Customer Relations {#sect-00009}

The bottom line is that profitable customer relationships are the
"secret sauce" of any business. This step in the marketing process is
where marketers acquire, keep, and grow customer relationships.
Successful marketers know that acquiring customers is one of the hardest
(not to mention one of the most expensive) elements of marketing.
However, when you know clearly who those potential customers are, you
can more effectively determine how to reach them, thus maximizing your
marketing dollars.

It isn't enough to have a one-and-done sale. You want repeat buyers, so
marketers need to remind customers about the company's products and/or
services and how those products and services have met their needs and
improved their lives so they make repeat purchases. Marketers need to
consider how to reach customers about their offerings and make it easy
and convenient for those customers to make continued purchases.

When customers have a positive relationship with a company or its
products or services, they're more likely to become repeat buyers.
Satisfied customers are also more likely to be interested in buying
additional products or services from your company, and they tend to
recommend products to others, further reducing the company's costs of
getting new customers.

## Step 5: Capture Customer Value in the Form of Profits {#sect-00010}

The goal of successful customer relationship management (CRM) is
creating high customer equity---the potential profits a company earns
from its current and potential customers. It's a relatively simple
concept: increasing customer loyalty results in higher customer equity.

Increasing customer equity is the goal of marketers because it's a
bellwether for financial success. Think about it in simple terms: the
higher a company's customer equity, the more profit the company
generates, and the more valuable that company (and its products or
services) becomes on the market.

:::: {#note-00014 .note}
::: title
Marketing Jobs
:::

In every chapter of this book, you'll find this Careers in Marketing
section. It's meant to outline various jobs so you can be well informed
of all the things marketers do. These sections will outline various job
roles, what you do day-to-day, qualifications needed, and sometimes even
salary information.

If you've decided you want a job in marketing, it's important to know
what kinds of jobs exist and what's expected in each role. Google and
YouTube searches will bring you all kinds of information. It's
recommended that you check out the insights from people in these roles
and maybe even connect with them to ask them questions. Please do your
homework, and determine what you like to do with your day, what you're
good at, and how to build a network to find the right job for you.

Here are a handful of resources to get your thinking started:

HubSpot: "

How to Start Your Marketing Career When You Know Nothing About Marketing

"

Setup: "

The Marketing Career Path: From Entry-Level to Chief Marketing Officer

"

Coursera: "

Your Guide to Landing an Entry-Level Marketing Job

"

Skillshare: "

12 Entry-Level Marketing Jobs You Can Pursue Right Now

"

Indeed: "

Entry Level Marketing Salary in the United States

"

Whatever job role you choose, marketing is a creative, interesting, and
at times exciting role where you can make a real impact on people's
lives. Enjoy!
::::

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00011}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00012}

:::: {#rf-006 .note}
::: title
:::

6\.

"Definitions of Marketing," American Marketing Association, last
modified July 12, 2022,
https://www.ama.org/the-definition-of-marketing-what-is-marketing/.
::::

:::: {#rf-007 .note}
::: title
:::

7\.

Marketing and the 7Ps: A Brief Summary of Marketing and How It Works

(Maidenhead, UK: The Chartered Institute of Marketing, 2009),
https://www.thensmc.com/sites/default/files/CIMpercent207Pspercent20Resource.PDF
::::

:::: {#rf-008 .note}
::: title
:::

8\.

"The Purpose of Marketing," Business, Tutor2u, updated March 22, 2021,
https://www.tutor2u.net/business/reference/the-purpose-of-marketing.
::::

:::: {#rf-009 .note}
::: title
:::

9\.

"Internal Marketing: What It Is and Why You Need It,"

Martyn Bassett Associates Blog

, Martyn Bassett Associates, March 4, 2021,
https://www.mbassett.com/blog/internal-marketing.
::::

:::: {#rf-010 .note}
::: title
:::

10\.

Hitesh Bhasin, "What Is Form Utility? Definition, Meaning and Examples,"
Marketing91, February 1, 2020,
https://www.marketing91.com/form-utility/.
::::

:::: {#rf-011 .note}
::: title
:::

11\.

"Marketing Process: 5 Steps of Marketing Process," iEduNote, last
modified October 16, 2020, https://www.iedunote.com/marketing-process.
::::

:::: {#rf-012 .note}
::: title
:::

12\.

"Who Owns Volkswagen?," Lindsay Volkswagen of Dulles, last modified
March 1, 2022, https://www.lindsayvolkswagen.com/who-owns-volkswagen/.
::::

:::: {#rf-013 .note}
::: title
:::

13\.

Ana Khlystova, "5 Steps to Creating a Customer-Driven Marketing
Strategy,"

HelpCrunch Blog

, HelpCrunch, July 2, 2019,
https://helpcrunch.com/blog/customer-driven-marketing-strategy/.
::::

:::: {#rf-014 .note}
::: title
:::

14\.

"Value Proposition," Corporate Finance Institute, CFI Education, updated
February 27, 2022,
https://corporatefinanceinstitute.com/resources/knowledge/strategy/value-proposition/.
::::

:::: {#rf-015 .note}
::: title
:::

15\.

Mark Boedecker, "Value = Benefits/Cost," Direct from Midrex, Midrex
Technologies, September 2020,
https://www.midrex.com/commentary/value-benefits-cost/.
::::

:::: {#rf-016 .note}
::: title
:::

16\.

Melissa Traynor, "Building Profitable Customer Relationships,"

Small Business Success Blog

, SCORE, June 27, 2019,
https://sanluisobispo.score.org/blog/building-profitable-customer-relationships.
::::

:::: {#rf-017 .note}
::: title
:::

17\.

"What Is Customer Equity: Definitive Guide," Internet Marketing 101,
SendPulse, updated August 27, 2021,
https://sendpulse.com/support/glossary/customer-equity.
::::

# 

customer-driven marketing strategy

a marketing strategy that shifts the focus from the product or service
to its users

customer equity

total combined customer lifetime values of all the company's customers

customer value

the ratio of the perceived benefits relative to the costs incurred by
the customer in acquiring the product or service

external interested parties

a person or organization that does not have a direct relationship with a
company but is affected by the operations of the business

form utility

the value given to a product by virtue of the fact that the materials
and components that comprise it have been combined to make the finished
product

interested parties

a group that has an interest in a company or organization and can either
affect or be affected by it; often referred to as "stakeholders"

internal marketing

the promotion of a company's objectives, products, and services to
internal parties, such as employees, owners, managers, and shareholders

internal interested parties

those persons whose interest in a company comes through a direct
relationship such as employment, ownership, or investment

marketing

the activities a company undertakes to promote the buying or selling of
a product or service

marketing process

the series of steps that assist businesses in planning, analyzing,
implementing, and adjusting their marketing strategy

marketing strategy

a plan of action designed to promote or sell a product or service

place utility

making goods and/or services physically available or accessible to
potential customers

possession utility

the amount of usefulness or perceived value from owning a product

time utility

adding value to the consumer by having the product or service available
when the consumer needs it

utility

how a product can be useful to customers in a way that convinces them to
make a purchase

value proposition

a promise of value to be delivered, communicated, and acknowledged
