m00008

e1daf5ef-94f1-465e-afd9-72cb256cc436

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define and describe the marketing mix.

List and explain the 4Ps of marketing.

# Marketing Mix Defined {#sect-00002}

Having a great product or service is just the first step in establishing
a successful business or building a successful brand. The best product
or service in the world won't translate to profits unless people know
about it. How do you reach customers and help them connect with your
product? That's the role of the marketing mix.

The marketing mix is commonly referred to as the tactics a company can
use to promote its products or services in the market in order to
influence consumers to buy. The marketing mix is also known as the 4Ps:
product, price, place, and promotion (see [\#](#)). Let's look more
closely.

The

product

is the good or service that the company provides.

The

price

is what the consumer pays in exchange for the product.

The

place

is where the product is purchased.

Promotion

is comprised of advertising, sales, and other communication efforts the
company utilizes to attract the customer.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# The 4Ps of Marketing {#sect-00003}

To this point, we've been talking marketing in somewhat of an abstract
manner. Instead of continuing with a theoretical discussion of the
marketing mix and the 4Ps of marketing, we're going to approach these
topics using an example of a product you probably already own---a
backpack. Let's get started.

## Product {#sect-00004}

Remember: product refers to a good or service that a company offers to
its customers. Let's consider a product that many of you likely own as a
college student: a backpack (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

In terms of the first of the 4Ps, marketing analyzes the needs of
consumers who buy backpacks and decides if they want more and/or
different bags. For example, marketing will analyze what features
consumers want in the bag. Do they want a water bottle pocket, padded
shoulder straps, reflective tape, a padded laptop sleeve, or organizer
pockets? Think about your own bag for a moment: Why did you buy this
particular product? What features did it have that made it appealing to
you?

Armed with market research knowledge, marketing then attempts to predict
what types of backpacks different consumers will want and which of these
consumers they will try to satisfy. For example, are you selling bags to
adults for their children's use? Are you selling them to young adults
who might want more (or different) graphics on the bag? Are you selling
to adults who will use these bags for work or for school?

Marketing will then estimate how many of these consumers will purchase
backpacks over the next several years and how many bags they'll likely
purchase. Marketing will also estimate how many competitors will be
producing backpacks, how many they'll produce, and what types.

## Price {#sect-00005}

Price is the amount consumers pay for a product or service. There's a
delicate balance here. On one hand, marketers must link the price to the
product's real or perceived benefits while at the same time taking into
consideration factors like production costs, seasonal and distributor
discounts, and pricing product lines and different models within the
line.

Marketers attempt to estimate how much consumers are willing to pay for
the backpack and---perhaps more importantly---if the company can make a
profit selling at that price. Pricing products or services can be both
an art and a science. In the case of our backpack example, the company
wants to determine two things:

What's the minimum price that the company can charge for the backpack
and still make a profit?

What's the maximum price that the company can charge for the backpack
without losing customers?

The "correct" answer usually lies somewhere in between those points on
the price continuum.

## Promotion {#sect-00006}

Promotion includes advertising, public relations, and many other
promotional strategies, including television and print advertisements,
internet and social media advertising, and trade shows. A company's
promotional efforts must increase awareness of the product and
articulate the reasons why customers should purchase their product.
Remember: the goal of any promotional activity is to reach the "right"
consumers at the right time and the right place.

In terms of our backpack example, marketing now needs to decide which
kinds of promotional strategies should be used to tell potential
customers about the company's backpacks. For instance, should you use TV
advertisements to make customers aware of the backpack? If so, you'll
want to run your commercials during programs that your target audience
watches. For example, if you're selling backpacks to children (or trying
to entice them to badger their parents to purchase them), children's
cartoons may be the most cost-effective avenue to reach your target
market. If your backpacks are designed for work or school, you'll likely
decide to advertise on television programs that target younger adults.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
Netflix, JanSport, and *Stranger Things*
:::

A real-world promotional example is the recent brand partnership between
Netflix and JanSport, the backpack company. These two companies
collaborated on a *Stranger Things*--branded backpack with the launch of
the fourth season of *Stranger Things* in 2022. This collaboration
created five Hawkins-inspired backpacks centered on various *Stranger
Things* themes. [Read more about this promotion and see the backpacks
here](#).
::::

Perhaps you'll decide to run magazine print ads. If so, you'll need to
decide in which magazines you'll place the ads. Most magazines have a
very specific readership demographic consisting of factors such as age,
gender, and interests. If you're going to advertise those backpacks with
print ads, you'll want to leverage readership demographics to ensure
that your message is being seen by the right consumers---those who are
most likely to buy your backpacks.

What about internet advertising? Internet advertising (sometimes known
as online advertising or digital advertising) is a promotional strategy
in which the company utilizes the internet as a medium to deliver its
marketing messages. If you're going to go the digital route, what types
of internet advertising will you use? Search engine marketing? Email
marketing? Social media ads? TikTok videos?

## Place {#sect-00007}

Place considerations focus on how and where to deliver the product to
the consumer most likely to buy it. Where did you buy your backpack? Did
you buy it in a big box store, online, in an office products store, or
perhaps even the school bookstore? Once again, through market research,
marketers determine where potential customers will be and how to get the
company's backpacks to them.

One important factor to note about the importance of place in the
marketing mix is that it doesn't refer to the location of the company
itself but rather to the location of the customers or potential
customers. Place deals with strategies the marketer can employ to get
those backpacks from their present location---a warehouse, for
example---to the location of the customers.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00008}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00009}

:::: {#rf-018 .note}
::: title
:::

18\.

"Magazine Advertising: A Primer," Resources for Entrepreneurs, Gaebler
Ventures, accessed January 4, 2022,
https://www.gaebler.com/Magazine-Advertising.htm.
::::

# 

internet advertising

a set of tools for delivering promotional messages to people worldwide,
using the internet as a global marketing platform

marketing mix

the set of actions or tactics that a company uses to promote its brand
or product in the market

place

the geographical location in which the company sells its products and/or
provides its services

price

the cost that consumers pay in order to acquire a product or service

product

anything that can be offered to a market that might satisfy a want or
need

promotion

any type of marketing communication used to inform audiences of the
relative merits or a product, service, or brand
