m00009

0e4aee1c-859b-48ba-8e86-e803272da368

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define and describe the marketing environment.

Explain the components of the marketing environment.

Identify and describe the internal factors of the marketing environment.

List and describe the components of the micro- and macroenvironments.

# The Marketing Environment Defined {#sect-00002}

Organizations don't operate in a vacuum. They're not self-contained,
self-sufficient machines; rather, they are complex systems that require
interaction with facets of both their internal and external environments
in order to survive and prosper. In this section, we're going to explore
the internal and external factors that drive an organization's marketing
activities.

The marketing environment is comprised of both the external and internal
factors and forces that influence an organization's decision regarding
its marketing activities. Some of these factors---internal factors---
are within the control of the organization. Other factors---external
factors---are outside the control of the organization. We'll explore
these in more depth below.

To illustrate this concept of internal and external factors and forces,
think about your body as an organization. Your body is composed of
several internal organs and systems, like your heart, lungs, and
digestive system. These organs and systems function both independently
and yet interdependently to keep your body going. The same is true with
a business. The systems of the business are the people and departments
that make up the internal organization (such as marketing, accounting,
human resources, etc.). And just like the human body, these systems
function independently and interdependently.

At the same time, your body is exposed to external influences, like
expectations from your family and friends, cultural or gender
stereotypes, and family responsibilities, that influence decision-making
in either a positive or negative way. The same is true of the marketing
activities of a business. They're influenced by factors both from the
macroenvironment and the microenvironment. Let's take a closer look at
these factors.

# The Components of the Marketing Environment {#sect-00003}

As we'll explore below, the internal environment is company-specific and
includes the 5M framework and organizational culture. The external
environment is subdivided into two components: the microenvironment (or
task environment) and the macroenvironment (or broad environment), as
illustrated in [\#](#)

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

## Components of the Internal Environment {#sect-00004}

The internal environment in marketing refers to those elements *within*
the organization that define the atmosphere within the company's
structure. These factors include what's known as the 5Ms of marketing
and organizational culture.

The 5Ms of marketing (sometimes also called the 5M framework) is a
marketing/management model that defines the elements of a marketing
strategy that must be addressed in order to be successful. The five
elements (sometimes known as the organization's assets) include minds,
minutes, machinery, materials, and money. Let's take a closer look at
each of these factors:

Minds (Staffing):

This "M" might well be considered the most important factor because it's
people who make sure the rest of the 5Ms are utilized in a productive
manner to achieve the goals of the organization.

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Minutes (Time):

Time is another valuable asset. We've all heard the saying that time is
money, and this is true within the marketing arena. For example, in
formulating and implementing a new strategy, marketing needs to assess
factors such as whether existing production processes are as efficient
and effective as they can be, the length of time it takes the
organization to introduce a new product to the market, and how
responsive the organization is to competitive pressures.

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Machinery (Equipment):

Machinery consists of the equipment and/or physical assets used to
process materials into finished or semifinished products.

Materials (Production):

Materials consist of the inputs needed to produce goods and services.

Money (Finance):

Perhaps second only to staffing, money is a very critical resource
because it's used to acquire and/or hire other resources.

Organizational culture is comprised of the shared values, attitudes,
expectations, norms, and practices that guide the actions of all within
the company. Think about organizational culture as "the way we do things
around here," and the culture can help or hinder an organization. For
example, a good culture embodies positive traits that lead to improved
performance and profit. On the other hand, a dysfunctional culture
that's toxic and/or inefficient can hinder even the most successful
organization.

For an example of a positive organizational culture, consider Zappos,
where happiness is at the core. Founder Tony Hsieh wrote a book on the
topic and has said, "We're willing to give up short-term profits or
revenue growth to make sure we have the best culture." Hsieh was not
afraid to put his money where his mouth was, either. In support of
maintaining an outstanding company culture and a productive workforce,
he instituted a policy that would pay new, unhappy employees \$2,000 to
quit following their four-week training period.

By contrast, consider what a dysfunctional culture can do to an
organization. During the summer of 2020, *The Ellen DeGeneres Show* was
called out for having a toxic work environment. Eleven employees spoke
out publicly about the negative organizational culture. There were
allegations of sexual misconduct, intimidation, and racism. Ratings
faltered as a result of the allegations, and DeGeneres ultimately
decided to end her daytime talk show.

But how does organizational culture impact marketing? Here are three
very tangible ways that your company's culture can make a positive
impact on marketing:

Branding and marketing efforts emanate from the organization's core
values and culture and guide the organization's marketing message.
Therefore, if your marketing message doesn't match the reality of the
business, it's akin to that old adage of "putting lipstick on a pig."

:::: {#note-00008 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

You're talking the talk but not walking the walk.

A strong culture strengthens your marketing message because it gives
prospective customers a better idea of the values of your business, and
customers who know what you believe and value are much more likely to do
business with you. For example, research has demonstrated that 86
percent of buyers are willing to pay more for a positive customer
service experience.

:::: {#note-00009 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Once again, think about the culture at Zappos. One of the ways in which
the company has developed a strong following of loyal customers is
through its policy that call-center employees are empowered to do
"whatever it takes" to make the customer happy. Call-center employees
don't use scripts for calls, and there are literally no time limits on
calls.

:::: {#note-00010 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

A strong organizational culture is also key in attracting and retaining
employees. In his quest for a happier, more positive work environment,
Hsieh implemented several policies at Zappos that he felt contributed to
this environment, including a relaxed dress code, discounted food and
drink, relaxation areas, and more.

:::: {#note-00011 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

TOMS

(featured in Companies with a Conscience later in this chapter) is
another excellent example of this.

## Components of the External Environment {#sect-00005}

There are two elements within the external marketing environment: the
microenvironment and the macroenvironment. Although the factors within
these environments are not directly within the marketer's control, they
still influence the decisions made by marketers. We'll first examine the
factors in the microenvironment, as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

The microenvironment consists of five predominant factors.

Suppliers

. Suppliers (sometimes also called

vendors

) are those partners from whom we receive the parts and products
necessary for our business. Let's assume that your company produces
microwave ovens. Some of your suppliers may be providers of
transformers, the turntable, control panels, magnetrons, etc. As long as
you have options in terms of the component suppliers, the bargaining
power of each supplier is relatively weak. However, if two suppliers
merge and decide to raise the price of the component the new entity
supplies, that vendor now wields increased power.

Market Intermediaries.

Often, products are distributed by third-party sellers such as
retailers, wholesalers, and others in the distribution channel. The
reputation of these market intermediaries plays an important role in the
marketing of the product or service, both positive and negative, so
companies need to select and monitor market intermediaries on an ongoing
basis. We'll learn more about the roles of these intermediaries in

Distribution: Delivering Customer Value

, but let's provide a couple of definitions and examples to help you
better understand some of the parties in the distribution channel.

Retailers

(like

Walmart

or

Target

) purchase large quantities of goods from producers and then sell
smaller quantities to end customers for personal use or consumption.

Wholesalers

purchase large quantities of products from producers and then sell to
smaller businesses such as retail stores. A good example of a wholesaler
is

Gexpro

, which sells electrical supplies for the construction industry.

Customers.

Understanding who your customers are will enable you to effectively
reach them, whether online, locally in retail stores, or
internationally.

Competitors.

Successful marketing strategies must be implemented after consideration
of your competition. Knowing who your competition is and what they are
and are not offering allows you to find the gap in the market. You want
to be where the competition is not, at least in the sense of offering
something unique to a targeted market.

General Public

. Because companies provide their offerings in communities that support
them, they have an obligation to satisfy those communities. There's an
old saying that "perception is reality," so marketers' actions must be
evaluated through the perceptual lens of those communities, because the
public's perception of you---your reputation---is essential to your
success.

:::: {#note-00012 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

# Components of the Macroenvironment {#sect-00006}

Obviously, marketers can't ignore what's going on in the external
environment. One of the tools used by companies to assess the
environment in which they are operating is a PESTLE analysis. PESTLE is
an acronym for political, economic, social, technological, legal, and
environmental factors that provide marketers with a comprehensive view
of the whole environment from multiple angles. These macroenvironment
factors can be used to understand current external influences so that
marketers can more easily identify what might change in the future,
mitigate the identified risks, and take advantage of competitive
opportunities (see [\#](#)).

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

Let's look at these factors more closely:

Political Factors.

These factors include environmental and trade restrictions, political
stability, and business policy. For example,

Tesla

announced in late 2021 that it is moving its headquarters out of
California to Texas, following similar announcements by

Hewlett Packard Enterprise (HPE)

and

Oracle

, citing such things as lower housing costs and tax rates and fewer
regulations, making it easier for companies to operate in Texas.

Economic Factors.

Economic factors play a huge role in terms of a company's prospects in a
market. For example, economic factors affect pricing and can even
influence the supply/demand curve for a product or service. For example,
high inflation causes consumers to have less spending power, which
translates into lower sales and revenue. In 2022, consumers experienced
both product shortages and higher prices, blamed largely on COVID-19,
Russia's war on Ukraine, and the availability of certain commodities,
such as corn, sunflower oil, and wheat.

:::: {#note-00014 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Social Factors.

Social factors take in a wide swath of elements, such as cultural norms
and expectations, health consciousness, population growth/decline, the
age distribution of a population, and even career attitudes. Let's take
one of these factors---age distribution---and examine how it impacts
marketing. Baby boomers (born between 1946 and 1964) comprise
approximately a quarter of the US population. It's largely as a result
of this group's aging and retirement that active adult communities such
as

Del Webb

and others have sprung up across the nation.

:::: {#note-00015 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Technological Factors.

These factors encompass the innovations and developments in technology
that impact an organization's operations, as well as the rate of
technological change. For example, look at one simple technological
change with which we've all become comfortable in the public arena over
the past decade or so: free WiFi.

Starbucks

was able to take advantage of this change and reposition its
coffeehouses and differentiate itself from competitors by offering free
WiFi.

:::: {#note-00016 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Legal Factors.

These factors include changes to legislation impacting employment,
industry regulation, licenses and permits, and intellectual property.

Environmental Factors.

In the context of a PESTLE analysis, environmental factors refer to
variables affecting the physical environment, like climate change,
pollution, the scarcity of raw materials, and the growing concern over
companies' carbon footprints.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00007}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00008}

:::: {#rf-019 .note}
::: title
:::

19\.

"How to Use the 5 M's of Marketing to Review Internal Resources,"

Oxford College of Marketing Blog

, Oxford College of Marketing, last modified April 13, 2019,
https://blog.oxfordcollegeofmarketing.com/2018/06/25/how-to-use-the-5-ms-of-marketing-to-review-internal-resources/.
::::

:::: {#rf-020 .note}
::: title
:::

20\.

Oxford College of Marketing, "Use the 5 M's."
::::

:::: {#rf-021 .note}
::: title
:::

21\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-022 .note}
::: title
:::

22\.

Kellie Wong, "Organizational Culture: Definition, Importance, and
Development,"

Engage

(blog), Achievers, May 7, 2020,
https://www.achievers.com/blog/organizational-culture-definition/.
::::

:::: {#rf-023 .note}
::: title
:::

23\.

Gustavo Razzetti, "How Zappos Designs Culture Using Core Values,"

Culture Design Blog Posts

, Fearless Culture, December 9, 2019,
https://www.fearlessculture.design/blog-posts/zappos-culture-design-canvas.
::::

:::: {#rf-024 .note}
::: title
:::

24\.

Katie Canales, "Tony Hsieh, the Late Former CEO of Zappos, Famously
Pioneered the Concept of Paying New, Unhappy Employees \$2,000 to Quit
in Order to Maintain a Happy, Productive Workforce," Insider, November
30, 2020,
https://www.businessinsider.com/zappos-tony-hsieh-paid-new-workers-to-quit-the-offer-2020-11
::::

:::: {#rf-025 .note}
::: title
:::

25\.

Krystie Lee Yandoli, "Ellen DeGeneres Is Ending Her TV Show after
Allegations of Sexual Misconduct and a Toxic Workplace," BuzzFeed News,
May 12, 2021,
https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/krystieyandoli/ellen-degeneres-show-ending.
::::

:::: {#rf-026 .note}
::: title
:::

26\.

Laura Click, "How a Strong Company Culture Dramatically Improves Your
Marketing," Blue Kite, last modified October 13, 2016,
https://flybluekite.com/successful-marketing-relies-well-defined-company-culture/.
::::

:::: {#rf-027 .note}
::: title
:::

27\.

Toma Kulbytė, "Key Customer Experience Statistics You Need to Know,"

SuperOffice Blog

, SuperOffice, updated June 24, 2021,
https://www.superoffice.com/blog/customer-experience-statistics/.
::::

:::: {#rf-028 .note}
::: title
:::

28\.

Bill Taylor, "Why Zappos Pays New Employees to Quit---and You Should
Too,"

Harvard Business Review

, May 19, 2008, https://hbr.org/2008/05/why-zappos-pays-new-employees.
::::

:::: {#rf-029 .note}
::: title
:::

29\.

Julianna Young, "7 Zappos Amenities That Boost Employee Happiness,"

Zappos.com Culture Blog

, Zappos.com, June 12, 2019,
https://www.zappos.com/about/stories/employee-happiness-amenities.
::::

:::: {#rf-030 .note}
::: title
:::

30\.

"The Impact of Micro and Macro Environment Factors on Marketing,"

Oxford College of Marketing Blog

, Oxford College of Marketing, last modified November 8, 2021,
https://blog.oxfordcollegeofmarketing.com/2014/11/04/the-impact-of-micro-and-macro-environment-factors-on-marketing/.
::::

:::: {#rf-031 .note}
::: title
:::

31\.

"What Is PESTLE Analysis? An Important Business Analysis Tool," PESTLE
Analysis, last modified November 23, 2021,
https://pestleanalysis.com/what-is-pestle-analysis/.
::::

:::: {#rf-032 .note}
::: title
:::

32\.

Megan Cerullo, "Product Shortages and Soaring Prices Reveal Fragility of
US Supply Chain," CBS News, CBS Interactive, April 13, 2022,
https://www.cbsnews.com/news/product-shortages-inflation-supply-chain-2022/.
::::

:::: {#rf-033 .note}
::: title
:::

33\.

Gregg Logan and Todd LaRue, "Marketing to Baby Boomers One More Time,"

The Advisory

, May 30, 2019,
https://www.rclco.com/publication/marketing-to-baby-boomers-one-more-time/.
::::

:::: {#rf-034 .note}
::: title
:::

34\.

Thomas Bush, "PESTLE Analysis: Technological Factors Affecting
Business," PESTLE Analysis, July 11, 2016,
https://pestleanalysis.com/technological-factors-affecting-business/.
::::

# 

5Ms of marketing

internal elements of a marketing plan that need to be resolved if the
plan is successful

macroenvironment

the set of external factors and forces, not controlled by the company,
that influence its operations

marketing environment

all of the internal and external factors that drive and influence an
organization's marketing activities

microenvironment

those factors or elements in a firm's immediate environment that affect
its performance and decision-making

organizational culture

beliefs and behaviors that determine how a company's employees and
management interact and handle customer relationships

PESTLE analysis

a strategic framework used to assess the political, economic, social,
technological, legal, and environmental factors affecting an
organization

retailers

companies that purchase large quantities of goods from producers and
then sell smaller quantities to end customers for personal use or
consumption

suppliers

sometimes also called

vendors

, these are partners from whom we receive the parts and products
necessary for our business

wholesalers

companies that purchase large quantities of products from producers and
then sell to smaller businesses, such as retail stores
