m00010

11ffab65-a8b5-4906-881b-c55b4af45407

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Describe the production concept.

Define the product concept.

Discuss the selling concept.

Explain the marketing concept.

Summarize the societal marketing concept and its features.

# The Evolution of Marketing {#sect-00002}

So now you've gotten the bird's-eye view of marketing as a practice, and
you now know what marketing is. However, let's take a trip back through
time to look at the evolution of marketing practices and how many of
today's marketing strategies came to be. As you can see from [\#](#),
and to use an old TV commercial tagline, you've come a long way, baby!

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# The Production Concept {#sect-00003}

In order to understand the production concept, it's important first to
understand the history of technology and mass production. Spurred on by
the use of steam power, the Industrial Revolution began in the United
States by the middle of the 19th century. Although much of the
population was still employed in agriculture, the expansion of commerce
and industry drew millions of factory workers into cities and towns.
Suddenly, an abundance of manufactured goods was available to households
at a rate never experienced before.

The production concept assumed that consumers were mostly interested in
product availability and price, not necessarily product features. As a
result, companies concentrated on high production, low costs, and mass
distribution. In other words, to use the oft-used line from the movie
*Field of Dreams*, "If you build it, they will come." People were so
hungry for mass-produced goods that companies didn't have to do a lot of
sales or marketing. The production concept is thought to have lasted
from just after the Civil War (1861--1865) until the 1920s. For example,
inventor Samuel Colt's company began mass -producing revolvers in 1835.
The Waltham Watch Company (founded in 1850 in Waltham, MA) was the first
to use division of labor to mass produce watches and clocks.

# The Product Concept {#sect-00004}

From the 1920s until the 1950s, the product concept dominated. With
product availability a thing of the past, consumers began to favor
products that offered quality, performance, and/or innovative features.
As a result, companies concentrated on making superior products and
improving them over time. One of the problems with this type of thinking
is that marketers may fall in love with a product (known as "marketing
myopia") and may not realize what the market truly wants or needs.
Consider the manner in which railroad marketers overlooked the growing
competition from airlines, buses, and automobiles. In his book
*Marketing Myopia*, author Theodore Levitt writes, "The railroads did
not stop growing because the need for passenger and freight
transportation declined. That grew. The railroads are in trouble today
not because that need was filled by others (cars, trucks, airplanes and
even telephones) but because it was not filled by the railroads
themselves. They let others take customers away from them because they
assumed themselves to be in the railroad business rather than in the
transportation business."

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
The Reckoning
:::

When American cars developed a reputation for not being reliable or
dependable, this opened an opportunity for Toyota and other Japanese
exporters in the late 1960s and 1970s. Learn more about this issue from
David Halberstam's 1986 book *The Reckoning*. [Read the *New York Times*
1986 review of this book](#).
::::

# The Sales Concept {#sect-00005}

By the 1950s, mass production had become the norm rather than the
exception. Competition had increased over the years, and there was
little unfulfilled demand in the marketplace. Marketing evolved from
simply producing products that customers wanted to trying to persuade
customers to buy through advertising and personal selling. The basic
premise of the sales concept was that consumers and businesses need to
be "coaxed" into buying, and the aim of companies was to sell what they
made rather than make what consumers wanted.

# The Marketing Concept {#sect-00006}

The marketing concept was built on the premise that an organization will
achieve its goals when it satisfies the needs and wants of the consumer.
As a result, firms began to focus on customer needs *before* developing
products, rather than developing products and then trying to "sell" them
to consumers. The marketing concept was also the start of relationship
marketing--- fostering long-term relationships with customers in order
to ensure repeat sales and achieve stable relationships and reduced
costs.

# The Societal Marketing Concept {#sect-00007}

In a nutshell, the societal marketing concept is simple. Companies make
good marketing decisions by considering not only consumers' wants and
needs but additionally the balance between those wants and needs and the
company's capabilities and society's long-term interests. The concept
emphasizes the social responsibilities that companies bear. This means
meeting consumers' and businesses' current needs while simultaneously
being aware of the environmental impact of marketing decisions on future
generations' ability to meet their needs.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00008}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00009}

:::: {#rf-035 .note}
::: title
:::

35\.

"The Marketing Concept," OpExWorks.com Knowledge Base, OpExWorks
Solutions, accessed May 7, 2022,
http://www.opexworks.com/KBase/OpExWorks.com_Knowledge_Base.htm#Marketing_Management/The_Marketing_Concept.htm
::::

:::: {#rf-036 .note}
::: title
:::

36\.

Theodore Levitt,

Marketing Myopia

(Boston: Harvard Business Press, 2008).
::::

:::: {#rf-037 .note}
::: title
:::

37\.

"Societal Marketing Concept: Definition, Advantages, Examples,"
iEduNote, last modified June 13, 2021,
https://www.iedunote.com/societal-marketing-concept.
::::

# 

marketing concept

marketing philosophy that firms should analyze the needs of their
customers and then make decisions to satisfy those needs better than the
competition

product concept

the orientation that consumers will favor those products that offer the
most quality, performance, or innovative features

production concept

the orientation that consumers will always acquire products that are
cheaper and more readily available

sales concept

orientation that analyzes buying and selling effects to place the focus
primarily on generating sales transactions

societal marketing concept

philosophy that a company should make marketing decisions by considering
not only consumers' wants and the company's capabilities but also
society's long-term interests
