m00011

0f7f1c20-2086-4963-9acb-be3bee4b7431

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Explain how an organization identifies consumer needs and wants.

Describe the process through which an organization satisfies consumer
needs and wants.

# Identifying Consumer Needs and Wants {#sect-00002}

We've repeatedly mentioned satisfying customer needs. But understanding
those needs and/or wants isn't always as simple as it sounds. For
example, some customers have needs of which they're not fully aware;
others can't articulate their needs, or the words require some degree of
interpretation. Consider this: what does it mean when a customer asks
for a "restful" hotel, an "attractive" bathing suit, or a "powerful"
lawn mower?

Let's consider an example to illustrate this concept. A customer comes
into your car dealership and indicates that she wants to purchase an
inexpensive hybrid vehicle. That description is broad and subject to
interpretation, so it's essential that the marketer probe further,
because there are really five types of customers needs

Stated Needs

. Stated needs are those that are clearly specified by the customer.
It's what the customer requests. For example, you go into a big box
store such as Best Buy and tell the sales associate that you "need a new
phone."

Real Needs

. Real needs are one level above stated needs; they are more specific
and define the parameters that are immediate to defining and fulfilling
the need. In other words, real needs are what the stated needs actually
mean. What are our phone buyer's real needs? Are they looking for a
phone with long battery life, a high-resolution camera, or a lot of
internal memory?

Unstated Needs

. Unstated needs are what the customer also expects but doesn't ask for.
Once again, using our phone example, the consumer may expect but not
express the desire for good service from the carrier and/or the big box
store.

Delight Needs

. Delight needs are those that provide the "wow" factor. These needs,
like unstated needs, can make some products more desirable than others
if they meet those needs. Going back to our phone example, delight needs
can be something like a phone case or other promotional gift.

Secret Needs

. Secret needs are those that a customer may not state or realize but
can be one of the main reasons for choosing a particular product to
fulfill the basic stated need. Do customers want a new cell phone as a
status symbol but won't admit that status is important to them?

The bottom line is that responding only to a customer's stated need may
not satisfy the customer. The marketer needs to understand what the
customer really wants.

# Satisfying Consumer Needs and Wants {#sect-00003}

You may be asking yourself at this point, "Does marketing satisfy needs,
or does it create needs?" Some people feel that marketing creates needs
and pressures consumers into buying unneeded products or services.
However, marketing does not create needs; rather, it opens consumers'
eyes to their wants, and it's up to marketers to understand those wants
in order to guide consumers on the path to purchasing their products or
services. Marketing creates value, and value speaks to the satisfaction
of customer needs and the benefits customers receive from the product.
It's the customer, however, who ultimately determines how well the
product fulfills their needs and how much value the product creates.

The challenge for the marketing team is to succinctly and compellingly
articulate a value proposition that speaks directly to the benefits your
product or service delivers.

## The Value Proposition {#sect-00004}

A value proposition identifies the quantifiable benefits that customers
can expect when they choose to purchase your company's product or
service. A value proposition is, in effect, a promise from the company
to the customer, and it can serve as a competitive differentiator to
motivate customers to purchase your company's products or services. In
other words, your value proposition should bring together in a brief,
concise statement what your customer wants and/or needs and how your
product or service will meet those wants and needs better than your
competitors.

That's a bit abstract, so we thought we'd include a few examples of some
good value propositions:

Bill Ragan Roofing

: "Let us take the stress of roof repairs or a roof replacement off your
shoulders."

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Applied Educational Systems (AES)

: "Spend your time connecting with students, not planning and grading"

:::: {#note-00005 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

DuckDuckGo

: "Tired of being tracked online? We can help."

:::: {#note-00006 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

HelloFresh

: "Take the stress out of mealtime."

:::: {#note-00007 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

## The Exchange Process {#sect-00005}

Marketing facilitates what is known as the exchange process---the act of
obtaining a desired product or service from an individual or business by
providing in return something of value, as illustrated in [\#](#).

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

The buyer (or customer) initiates the exchange process. The buyer (who
has a want or need) is the individual or business who is willing to pay
money or provide other personal resources to satisfy this need or want.
Let's simplify that definition with an example. When lunchtime rolls
around and you're on campus or at your job, you're hungry; you have a
need for food and drink. You go to the dining hall or a nearby
restaurant to order lunch, and you're willing to pay money in exchange
for your meal. Simple, right?

Keep in mind here, however, that there is a difference between a
customer and a consumer. The customer is the individual or business that
purchases the product or service. The consumer is the user of the
product or service. To put this concept in simple terms, if a
grandmother buys a toy for her grandson, she is the customer; her
grandson (who will use the product) is the consumer. In the case of
going out for lunch, you're both the customer and the consumer.

The desired object is the product or service itself. It may be a
physical good, service, or experience that consumers expect will satisfy
their wants and/or needs. Let's go back to our lunch example. The
desired object is the meal. The seller is the individual or organization
that supplies the need-satisfying product, service, or experience. Once
again, in the lunch example, the seller would be the dining hall or the
restaurant.

Inherent in the exchange process is what's known as value---the benefit
to the customer or consumer relative to the cost in the exchange. In
other words, value is the monetary worth of the benefits the customer
receives in exchange for the product or service. Let's go back to our
backpack example a few sections ago. You may really want that backpack
because it keeps your "stuff" organized and it's lightweight (the
benefits), but if the cost is too high, either in terms of the monetary
cost or the time you'd have to spend going to the store to buy it, that
backpack won't have value for you. No sale!

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00006}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00007}

:::: {#rf-038 .note}
::: title
:::

38\.

"Needs: Meaning, Importance, Types & Example," MBA Skool, updated August
15, 2021,
https://www.mbaskool.com/business-concepts/marketing-and-strategy-terms/1916-needs.html.
::::

:::: {#rf-039 .note}
::: title
:::

39\.

Jonathan R. Ferrer, "The Great Controversy: Does Marketing Create or
Satisfy Needs?," LinkedIn, May 25, 2015,
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/great-controversy-does-marketing-create-satisfy-needs-r-ferrer-mba-5/.
::::

:::: {#rf-040 .note}
::: title
:::

40\.

"Value Proposition," Glossary, ProductPlan, last modified June 2, 2021,
https://www.productplan.com/glossary/value-proposition/.
::::

:::: {#rf-041 .note}
::: title
:::

41\.

Bill Ragan Roofing Company (website), accessed July 18, 2022,
https://www.billraganroofing.com/.
::::

:::: {#rf-042 .note}
::: title
:::

42\.

Ramona Sukhraj, "21 Value Proposition Examples That Every Marketer Can
Learn From in 2021,"

Newest Insights

(blog), IMPACT, June 3, 2021,
https://www.impactplus.com/blog/value-proposition-examples.
::::

:::: {#rf-043 .note}
::: title
:::

43\.

Sukhraj, "21 Value Proposition Examples."
::::

:::: {#rf-044 .note}
::: title
:::

44\.

Ibid.
::::

# 

buyer

a person or institution that purchases goods or services

consumer

the final user of a purchased product or service

customer

a person who purchases a product or service

delight needs

an added value that a customer might receive from a seller without prior
expectation or request for the same

desired object

a physical good, service, or experience that consumers expect will
satisfy their wants and/or needs

exchange process

the process of satisfying a need or want by giving something of value in
exchange

real needs

the value the customer is going to derive from the stated good or
service

secret needs

the needs that the consumer feels reluctant to admit

seller

the individual or organization that supplies the need-satisfying
product, service, or experience

stated needs

those product or service needs that are clearly specified by the
customer

unstated needs

those needs that are not obvious but are expected by the customer

value

the difference between a customer's evaluation of the benefits and costs
of one product when compared with others
