m00012

135a27e9-0239-4da1-b703-331876a2b79f

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define customer relationship management (CRM).

Describe the impact of CRM on customer loyalty and retention.

Explain how CRM builds customer equity.

# The Impact of CRM on Customer Loyalty and Retention {#sect-00002}

In the final analysis, companies want to accomplish two things: improve
customer service relationships and improve customer retention. It is
typically easier and less expensive to retain a loyal customer than
acquire a new one. One way to accomplish that is through customer
relationship management (CRM)---the means through which companies track,
manage, and analyze customer interactions.

There are a number of CRM software systems available in the marketplace,
and most accomplish the same thing. They basically track and work with
data about customers. For example, they link and analyze customer
contact information. They store and track contact with company
representatives, such as phone calls, emails, live chat conversations,
service requests, purchases, and returns. One good example of CRM
software is Salesforce, which is the market leader for CRM software in
North America, Western Europe, Latin America, and the Asia-Pacific
region.

There are many types of CRM software; however, most CRM software focuses
primarily on one of the following major categories:

Operational.

Operational CRM software deals with three types of operations:
marketing, sales, and service automation. Operational CRM software is
intended to assist businesses in automating how they approach leads and
potential customers in order to convert those potential customers into
actual customers.

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Analytical

.

Analytical CRM software is all about data management and analysis. The
software is designed to collect, organize, and analyze the inputted
data, providing management with insights needed to better understand
market trends, understand customer needs and wants, and make data-driven
strategic decisions.

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Collaborative.

No business functions on an island. When businesses share customer data
with one another, they gain insights and additional perspectives on
customer behavior that is mutually beneficial. This collaboration allows
each business to obtain information that it would not otherwise have
access to.

:::: {#note-00005 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Before we can explore how CRM impacts customer loyalty and retention,
it's probably a good time for a few definitions. Customer loyalty is an
ongoing positive relationship between a customer and a business.
Customer loyalty is at the crux of repeat purchases of your product
versus those of your competitors. One common way to accomplish this is
to offer reward/loyalty cards. For example, you may have a frequent
flyer card from an airline or a loyalty card from Starbucks or a
retailer like Designer Shoe Warehouse (DSW), which rewards VIP customers
with points for each purchase.

Customer retention is a closely related concept; it refers to a
company's ability to transform new customers into returning customers.
In its simplest terms, it's how you keep your customers coming back for
more. The goal of customer retention is to reduce the number of customer
defections, or those who buy your product at least once and then not
again.

How does CRM impact customer loyalty and retention? Let's take a look at
some of the ways CRM accomplishes this:

Leveraging Customer Data

.

With CRM, a business can gather data on your existing customers and
prospective customers so that their experience is a more positive one.
For example, you can keep track of important dates such as customer
birthdays or purchase anniversaries, and CRM software can send automatic
emails to them with coupons or other incentives.

:::: {#note-00006 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Enhanced Customer Communications

.

CRM software can be programmed to automatically send thank you notes to
customers, send newsletters regarding new products, and send customer
satisfaction surveys or polls so that you can glean more insight into
your customers' levels of satisfaction with your product or service.

:::: {#note-00007 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Ascertaining Customer Needs.

Fostering customer loyalty begins with understanding what your customers
want and need. An effective CRM program can track customers' purchase
history, habits and preferences, and even web and email interaction.
From this information, you can gain valuable insights that will aid you
in developing targeted marketing strategies.

:::: {#note-00008 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Gathering Feedback.

We'd previously mentioned distributing customer surveys through use of
your CRM software. This will provide you with valuable feedback not only
about customers' perceptions of your product or service but also about
their customer experiences. Have you ever received a message from

Amazon

after an online purchase, asking if you'd review the item you purchased?
That's likely the result of an effective CRM system.

:::: {#note-00009 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Managing Customer Loyalty Programs.

CRM software can assist you in identifying prospective loyalty program
members and track member rewards. Loyalty programs reward members for
purchases and have been shown to increase customer retention. For
example, according to research, approximately 84 percent of customers
indicate that loyalty programs are an incentive to remain with a brand,
and 66 percent report that their spending behavior is actually altered
by the ability to earn rewards.

:::: {#note-00010 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

# The Role of CRM in Building Customer Equity {#sect-00003}

We have already talked about customer equity---the potential profit a
company earns from all of its customers, both current and
potential---and customer equity is a core CRM benchmark. CRM isn't a
one-way communication street to customers. It's a two-way street that
allows customers to define and consequently shape offerings in terms of
their requirements. This paves the way for open, honest dialogue that
can ultimately lead to benefits to customers, thus resulting in higher
customer equity.

# Knowledge Check {#sect-00004}

It's time to check your knowledge on the concepts presented in this
section. Refer to the Answer Key at the end of the book for feedback.

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00005}

:::: {#rf-045 .note}
::: title
:::

45\.

Wesley Chai, Tim Ehrens, and Karolina Kiwak, "CRM (Customer Relationship
Management)," SearchCustomerExperience, TechTarget, September 25, 2020,
https://www.techtarget.com/searchcustomerexperience/definition/CRM-customer-relationship-management.
::::

:::: {#rf-046 .note}
::: title
:::

46\.

"Salesforce Ranked #1 in CRM Market Share for Eighth Consecutive Year,"
News & Insights, Salesforce, December 16, 2021,
https://www.salesforce.com/news/stories/salesforce-ranked-1-in-crm-market-share-for-eighth-consecutive-year/.
::::

:::: {#rf-047 .note}
::: title
:::

47\.

"A Brief on Three Types of CRM: Operational, Analytical, Collaborative,"

OroCRM Blog

, Oro, April 1, 2020,
https://oroinc.com/orocrm/blog/a-brief-on-three-types-of-crm-operational-analytical-collaborative/.
::::

:::: {#rf-048 .note}
::: title
:::

48\.

Oro, "Brief on Three Types."
::::

:::: {#rf-049 .note}
::: title
:::

49\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-050 .note}
::: title
:::

50\.

"How CRM Can Help in Strengthening Customer Loyalty,"

Commence CRM Blog

, Commence, July 26, 2020,
https://commence.com/blog/2020/07/26/crm-strengthening-customer-loyalty/.
::::

:::: {#rf-051 .note}
::: title
:::

51\.

Commence, "How CRM Can Help."
::::

:::: {#rf-052 .note}
::: title
:::

52\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-053 .note}
::: title
:::

53\.

Ibid.
::::

:::: {#rf-054 .note}
::: title
:::

54\.

Lindsey Peacock, "7 Innovative Customer Loyalty Programs to Keep Them
Coming Back,"

Ecommerce Marketing Blog

, Shopify, June 22, 2022, https://www.shopify.com/blog/loyalty-program.
::::

# 

customer loyalty

an ongoing positive relationship between a customer and a business

customer relationship management (CRM)

all strategies, techniques, tools, and technologies used by companies to
develop, acquire, and retain customers

customer retention

the ability of a company to turn customers into repeat buyers and
prevent them from switching to a competitor
