m00013

c0398aaa-f568-4e01-a070-1617b9867036

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define ethical marketing.

Describe the importance of ethical marketing.

Explain the dos and don'ts of ethical marketing.

# Ethical Marketing Defined {#sect-00002}

As the term suggests, ethical marketing involves companies not only
trying to market their products and services but considering how society
will benefit from the introduction of those offerings. It's not so much
a practice as it is a philosophy that tries to promote fairness,
honesty, and a sense of responsibility in all of the marketing done by
the company.

What are the principles of ethical marketing? According to Lapaas
Digital, a digital marketing agency based in Delhi, India, some of those
principles include the following:

All marketing should be true.

The privacy of the end user is most important.

Marketing campaigns must adhere to the norms, standards, rules, and
regulations set forth by the government and other lawmaking authorities.

Marketing professionals must be transparent about what they are trying
to convey and whom they are approaching to convey the same.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

# The Importance of Ethical Marketing {#sect-00003}

Ethics are critical to a company's reputation, particularly when public
opinion---particularly negative public opinion---can go viral in an
instant, thanks to social media.

Ask yourself a question: how important are a company's ethics to you
when you decide to purchase a product or service? According to new
research by Mintel, 56 percent of US consumers stop buying from
companies they believe are unethical. Perhaps even more importantly,
approximately one-third of consumers are inclined to tell others when
they perceive a brand to be taking actions that they perceive to be
honest, fair, and responsible. Taking this one step further, 29 percent
of them will share their support of ethical companies via social media.

# The Dos and Don'ts of Ethical Marketing {#sect-00004}

The data cited above presents a somewhat dire picture for companies that
do not practice ethical marketing, so let's take a look at some of the
dos and don'ts of ethical marketing.

First, the dos:

Ensure transparency.

Transparency is key, and marketers should attempt to provide the maximum
amount of information to the consumer regarding the product, its usage,
and safety concerns. For example,

Southwest Airlines

ran a clever marketing campaign entitled "Transfarency," promoting its
philosophy that customers should be treated honestly and fares should
actually stay low. The result? The campaign garnered nearly 5 million
likes on Facebook alone.

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

How's that for earning the trust of potential customers?

Respect data privacy.

As we noted in our discussion of CRM above, marketers have the ability
to collect vast amounts of data about consumers. Data privacy is the
biggest concern for consumers in this data-driven world, so marketers
must always respect data privacy. Consider the fallout experienced by

Vizio

(the TV manufacturer) when it was learned that its devices did not ask
customers for permission to track and report viewing information. The
amount of data being gathered and the fact that Vizio did not request
permission from customers meant the company was potentially in violation
of the Video Privacy Protection Act. The company was sued in a class
action lawsuit.

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Prioritize the concerns of the consumer.

No matter how small the concern of your consumer is, a marketer's top
priority should be to respond to those concerns in a prompt, meaningful
way. How long do you expect to wait for a response to an email to a
company regarding its product or service---a day, two days, a week? You
might be surprised to learn that, according to research, 42 percent of
consumers expect a response within 60 minutes and 32 percent expect a
response within 30 minutes. That illustrates the importance of
responding promptly in order to increase the chances of a positive
customer experience.

:::: {#note-00005 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Now, the don'ts:

Don't overemphasize or exaggerate.

In marketing, this is sometimes referred to as "puffery." Of course, you
want to convey the features and benefits of the product or service to
the customer, but these need to be stated clearly and accurately. Don't
promise something you can't deliver--- doing so is unethical and not
beneficial in the long run.

Don't make false or unverified claims.

One case illustrates the importance of honesty in advertising:

Living Essentials, LLC

, the makers of 5-Hour Energy shots, advertised its product as
"doctor-recommended" and superior to traditional caffeine. Those claims
were found to be misleading, and Living Essentials, LLC was ordered to
pay \$4.3 million in damages.

:::: {#note-00006 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

Don't make false comparisons.

Not only shouldn't you make false or unverified claims about your own
products or services, but you shouldn't do it to competitors' products
either. As a matter of fact, companies can sue competitors for false
advertising claims under the federal Lanham Act, alleging that they
suffered lost sales or damage to their reputation as a result of the
false statements by the competitor.

:::: {#note-00007 .note}
::: title
:::
::::

:::: {#note-00008 .note}
::: title
TOMS Shoes
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

TOMS (see [\#](#)) was founded by Blake Mycoskie in 2006 after a trip to
Argentina, where he saw how people were living in impoverished areas.
Mycoskie decided to establish his company with giving in mind. He
introduced what he calls the "One for One" concept: for every pair of
TOMS shoes sold, the company donates another pair to a child in need. In
a recent *Impact Report*, TOMS reported it had provided more than 95
million pairs of shoes to children in 82 countries.

Emboldened by the success of the "One for One" concept, Mycoskie later
expanded the model. For example, in 2011, the company introduced a line
of eyewear and decided to use the same philanthropic principle but this
time with a bit of a twist. Instead of donating glasses, TOMS donated a
portion of the profits from each sale to save or restore the eyesight of
those living in developing countries. To give you an idea of the success
of this program, the company's website indicates that TOMS Eyewear has
helped restore sight to more than 780,000 people.
::::

#  {#sect-00005}

This chapter introduces the basic concepts of marketing, including
adding value to a company's business. Marketing begins with strategy and
relies on creating and delivering value to customers. It is crucial for
marketers to understand exactly what customers value and determine how
to deliver the value while also meeting company goals.

There are many activities involved in the marketing process, including
creating products and services, advertising, selling, distributing,
communicating, and building relationships. Marketers must also
acknowledge the importance of employees, suppliers, and other partners
involved in analyzing market opportunities. The most important aspect of
creating value is understanding both the customer and the marketplace.

There are many tools marketers can rely upon as they develop strategies.
The marketing mix---product, price, place, and promotion---has
traditionally comprised the marketer's toolbelt. Understanding the
marketing environment, or forces outside and within the control of
marketers, forms the context of all marketing efforts. Consumers
ultimately expect companies to be ethical, honest, and trustworthy.
Marketers know success is contingent upon abiding by ethical, societal,
and corporate governance standards.

#  {#sect-00006}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00007}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00008}

MARKETING PLAN PROJECT---PART I

During this course, you will develop a marketing plan as part of a
semester-long project. The marketing plan that you develop will build
throughout the course over nine chapters of this textbook.

The purpose of Part I of this marketing plan project is twofold:

To become familiar with the Marketing Plan Template

To select a company or product for which you will be building the
marketing plan throughout the semester

Instructions:

Download the Marketing Plan Template

and SAVE THIS DOCUMENT where you can easily access it again, because you
will be completing additional sections of the plan throughout the
course.

Select a company or product which will form the basis of your marketing
plan. When selecting a company, please be sure to select a company or
product that will (a) be of interest to you throughout the course and
(b) have sufficient information available about the company on the
internet for you to conduct research and make informed decisions in your
marketing plan.

When selecting a company, please be sure NOT to choose a company that is
so huge that it serves many diverse markets. For example,

General Electric

produces electrical and electronic equipment, aircraft engines, medical
electronics; it also provides financial services and more.

Procter & Gamble

also has diverse product lines, including beauty, grooming, health care,
fabric and home care, and feminine and family care. In the "real world,"
you would not prepare a single marketing plan for the entire company;
instead, each division and/or product line would develop its own
marketing plan. Therefore, if you want to use a large company, select a
brand or product line for the purpose of your marketing plan.

On the Marketing Plan Template, add your name and course number to the
header.

Complete the Company Profile Information on the Marketing Plan Template
for the company you have selected.

Save the template with a new name using this naming convention:
Course_First/LastName/Project Title. Example,
MKTG101_JohnSmith_Marketing Plan.

Submit this document to your instructor as directed.

#  {#sect-00009}

Taking college courses is a huge step forward in your professional
development. But there are additional activities that can also impact
your self-awareness and provide credentials sought by employers. Campus
career center directors, employers, and internship coordinators
repeatedly stress the following suggestions for improving your
employability.

Take free online courses through

LinkedIn

,

Coursera

,

Google

, or

Microsoft

. Completion of courses offers evidence of skill development. For
instance, Google Analytics for Beginners, Advanced Google Analytics, and
Fundamentals of Digital Marketing are all available for free since they
boost online education linked to Google's technology products. Some
courses even offer badges you can add to your LinkedIn profile, resume,
and cover letters. You can find more information about these programs by
reading these two articles from

The Report

, a source for trends on online education:

\[2022\] 800+ Hours of Free LinkedIn Learning Courses with Free
Certification

and

\[2022\] 600+ Google Free Certificates and Badges

.

Join campus clubs and organizations where you can be part of a
giving-back project, hone your project-management skills, or simply gain
leadership experience. Employers value your initiative.

Keep up with current events---read newspapers, blogs, and other news
sources that are pertinent to your field---because you'll need to carry
on a conversation and because what we do requires a good sense of what's
going on in the world.

Take advantage of campus services. Does your career center offer mock
interviews? Will the staff help you develop a resume or edit one you've
already written? Some colleges even offer short courses on etiquette.

Put together a list of possible references. Was your work in a
particular course memorable? If so, ask your professor if they would
refer you. Does your list of summer jobs indicate increasing
responsibility or use of your education? Be certain that all of your
references are on board; they must agree to give you an excellent
reference and then should be kept in the loop about jobs you've applied
for or, better yet, been offered.

Obtain a certification from HubSpot Academy, a well-known marketing
website. Learn about the various

certifications it offers by checking out its website

.

#  {#sect-00010}

The American Marketing Association (AMA) has teamed up with the Digital
Marketing Institute to offer specialized training within the marketing
discipline. You can set yourself apart from other marketers with
additional certifications. Are there other benefits you can take
advantage of? Take a look at one of the 65 chapters located across the
country. Is there one located in your city? Not only is membership a
great way to volunteer, it's also an effective way to market yourself to
potential employers. For instance, the [Minnesota Marketing
Association](#) welcomes students and professionals who are willing to
help plan programs and organize mentorship programs. You can reach out
to your state's AMA executive director and ask to interview them
regarding student membership rates or opportunities for college students
to interact with professional members. College students are also
encouraged to enter an annual competition that demonstrates their
marketing and business expertise before a panel of judges by providing
innovative solutions to a real-world challenge.

You can also learn a lot by following AMA blogs where insights, ideas,
and trends are discussed by knowledgeable professionals.

#  {#sect-00011}

## Batdorf & Bronson {#sect-00012}

Coffee is a global drink loved by so many. From the simple espresso in
Italy to the cinnamon added in Mexico, coffee is a global beverage. The
origins of coffee date back to the ninth century. Legend has it that in
a remote part of Ethiopia, a goat herder noticed his goats dancing about
and full of energy. He realized they had eaten some nearby small red
berries. Once the herder tried the berries, he too was dancing. The
small red berries ushered in the discovery of coffee as a drink we
cannot seem to get by without.

With a love for coffee and the thoughts of goats dancing in their heads,
husband and wife Larry and Cherie Challain opened their first coffee
bar---Dancing Goats in Olympia, Washington, in 1988. But as any coffee
entrepreneur knows, a coffee bar is only as good as the coffee it
serves. In a quest to serve the freshest coffee in the world, the duo
acquired Batdorf & Bronson Coffee Roasters.

Roasting good coffee starts with finding the best coffee beans. The
Challains know that to get good coffee beans, it is important to go to
the source. By developing direct relationships with coffee farmers,
Batdorf & Bronson is assured of the most sustainable and environmentally
sourced beans in the industry.

For example, the Ethiopia Sidamo Guji is a grade 1 natural-processed
bean grown on a privately held farm---Kayon Mountain. The farm is owned
by Ato Esmael and his family. This organic-certified farm produces
all-natural, sun-dried, and fully washed coffee. Sun drying means that
once the beans are picked and washed, they are dried on raised beds for
12--20 days.

It has been over 30 years since the Challains served their first cup of
coffee. Through their quest to improve the coffee experience for patrons
and to elevate the growing experience, the Challains expanded their
footprint. The duo knows that coffee beans are best served fresh.
Freshness means being close to the source. The journey from the family
farms to your cup is made easier through their additional roasting
facility in Atlanta, Georgia. Being centrally located on the West and
East Coasts means that beans can be roasted at either facility and be
within a day's delivery of their own Dancing Goats coffee bars in
Atlanta and Olympia as well as into the hands of their retail coffee
partners across the country.

Both roasting facilities in Washington and Georgia can serve customers.
Every Monday, orders are taken from the Dancing Goats retail partners.
Batdorf & Bronson waits to receive orders on Monday before beginning
roasting. For those who have not experienced the difference between
freshly roasted coffee and all the rest--- there is no comparison.
Coffee is roasted on Tuesday, and retail partners receive their
shipments on Wednesday.

Batdorf & Bronson is diligent about the roasting, brewing, and
extraction process for all of its Dancing Goats Coffee Bars. It is
equally concerned for its retail partners across the country. To provide
the support needed by its small independent coffee bars, it provides
instruction from its on-staff master baristas.

The experience of an adult coffee lover visiting a Batdorf & Bronson
roasting facility is similar to that of a kid winning the golden ticket
to the Willy Wonka Chocolate Factory. While your GPS is calculating the
yards before turning into the parking lot, you can smell the coffee
roasting. Upon entering the facility, you feel as though you are
entering a sophisticated laboratory. Scales, thermometers, pristine
roasting chambers, and carefully calibrated espresso machines are
everywhere. Bags of green coffee beans are piled high and deep. The
beans have recently arrived from the family farms located in coffee
regions around the world.

To be a retail partner with Batdorf & Bronson means that you have a team
behind you. It provides training for baristas, sample bags of new beans,
and roast profile sheets describing the growing and harvesting process
for the coffee you are serving your local community residents. Batdorf &
Bronson is as diligent with every cup of coffee served to a customer as
it is with every bean that is harvested and purchased for its roasting
facilities. Because of this laser-like focus on quality, a cup of coffee
brewed with Batdorf & Bronson beans is like no other coffee found at
your typical coffee shop.

For customers who frequent the Dancing Goats Coffee Bars, they know the
quality they can expect with their brewed coffee and espresso-based
coffee drinks, and for that quality Dancing Goats is the go-to coffee of
choice. For those who experience the Batdorf & Bronson difference at
local coffee bars nationwide, the fresh taste and exceptional quality
provide a reason to choose handcrafted, small-batch coffee shops over
traditional "fast-food" coffee chains.

To learn more [about this coffee company, check its website here](#).

## Case Questions {#sect-00013}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Endnotes {#sect-00014}

:::: {#rf-055 .note}
::: title
:::

55\.

"What Is Ethical Marketing? Complete Guide," Lapaas Digital, September
11, 2020, https://lapaas.com/ethical-marketing/.
::::

:::: {#rf-056 .note}
::: title
:::

56\.

"56percent of Americans Stop Buying from Brands They Believe Are
Unethical," Mintel Press Office, Mintel, November 18, 2015,
https://www.mintel.com/press-centre/social-and-lifestyle/56-of-americans-stop-buying-from-brands-they-believe-are-unethical.
::::

:::: {#rf-057 .note}
::: title
:::

57\.

"5 Brands That Used Transparency in Marketing and Won,"

The Alida Journal

(blog), Alida, July 8, 2016,
https://www.alida.com/the-alida-journal/5-brands-employed-transparency-marketing-and-won.
::::

:::: {#rf-058 .note}
::: title
:::

58\.

Eriq Gardner, "Vizio Can't Dodge Claims Its TVs Spy on Viewers,"

The Hollywood Reporter

, July 26, 2017,
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/business/business-news/vizio-cant-dodge-claims-tvs-spy-viewers-1024438/.
::::

:::: {#rf-059 .note}
::: title
:::

59\.

"When Silence Is the Best Response on Social Media," Insights & News,
BRG Communications, February 28, 2019,
https://brgcommunications.com/when-silence-is-the-best-response-on-social-media/.
::::

:::: {#rf-060 .note}
::: title
:::

60\.

Ashley Lombardo, "5-Hour Energy Found Guilty of Misleading Advertising,"
MedTruth, April 25, 2017,
https://medtruth.com/articles/news/5-hour-energy-misleading-advertising/.
::::

:::: {#rf-061 .note}
::: title
:::

61\.

Karl Kronenberger, "You Can Sue Your Competitor for False Advertising,"
News & Articles, Kronenberger Rosenfeld, September 20, 2018,
https://krinternetlaw.com/news/article-detail/you-can-sue-your-competitor-for-false-advertising.
::::

:::: {#rf-062 .note}
::: title
:::

62\.

Arezou Naeini et al., "Case Study: How TOMS Shoes Made a Cause the
Centre of Its Activities,"

Business Today

, June 7, 2015,
https://www.businesstoday.in/magazine/lbs-case-study/story/toms-shoes-shoes-for-free-cause-marketing-strategy-case-study-49364-2015-05-22.
::::

:::: {#rf-063 .note}
::: title
:::

63\.

TOMS Shoes,

TOMS Impact Report: 2019--2020

, 2021,
https://www.toms.com/on/demandware.static/-/Library-Sites-toms-content-global/default/pdfs/TOMS_Impact_Report.pdf.
::::

:::: {#rf-064 .note}
::: title
:::

64\.

"Our History," Dancing Goats Coffee,
https://www.dancinggoats.com/pages/our-history; Rachel Sanchez, "Two
Names No More: Batdorf & Bronson Becomes Dancing Goats Coffee In Company
Rebrand," Thurston Talk, March 24, 2022,
https://www.dancinggoats.com/blogs/blog/two-names-no-more-batdorf-bronson-becomes-dancing-goats-coffee-in-company-rebrand-by-rebecca-sanchez;
"Well-Known Olympia Coffee Business Changes Its Name,"

The Olympian

, April 29, 2022, https://www.theolympian.com/
::::

# 

ethical marketing

process that emphasizes trustworthy, transparent, social, and culturally
sensitive marketing policies
